
MODULE V. BIODIVERSITY

I. EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 (20.05.2020)
Bringing nature back into our lives

EU target: key commitments by 2030
1. Legally protect a minimum of 30% of the EU?s land area and 30% of the EU?s Sea area and integrate ecological corridors, as part of a true Trans-European Nature Network.
2. Strictly protect at least a third of the EU?s protected areas, including all remaining EU primary and old-growth forests.
3. Effectively manage all protected areas, defining clear conservation objectives and measures, and monitoring them appropriately.

Biodiversity is the diversity of life on earth: of genes, species and ecosystems. In addition to its intrinsic value, it underpins the ecosystem services that sustain our lives in multiple ways. They provide food, water and medicine; ensure soil and water regulation, pollination, erosion and flood control, disease control, and carbon storage. Biodiversity is indispensable for climate change mitigation and adaptation, and for maintaining human health. It also enhances recreational activity, creative inspiration and cultural heritage.
Biodiversity protection measures generally involve creating or expanding protected areas (PAs), clearly defined geographical spaces, recognized, dedicated and managed through legal or other effective means to achieve the long-term conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values.
Restoration is more complicated than protection. Restoration measures habitat management, rewilding, natural regeneration and sustainably productive lands and seas also playing an essential role. Modern agriculture has diminished biodiversity via intensive farming methods, such as monocultures and excessive use of chemicals. Restoration can transform degraded areas to landscapes providing multiple ecosystem services, balancing provisioning with regulating services via sustainable land management, including shifting cultivation and crop rotation, and greater incentives to farmers to adopt practices supporting biodiversity and ecosystem services. Nature-based solutions (NBS) can play a key role. 
The main direct drivers of biodiversity loss are changes in land and sea use, overexploitation, climate change, pollution, and invasive alien species. In addition to dedicated policies to mitigate these direct drivers, NBS, nature-friendly agriculture, sustainable fisheries and the restoration practices described above can reduce their impact. Most importantly, biodiversity needs to be mainstreamed across all productive and extractive sectors, such as mining, fisheries, forestry and agriculture.
Protecting and restoring biodiversity and well-functioning ecosystems is therefore key to boost our resilience and prevent the emergence and spread of future diseases. Over half of global GDP depends on nature and the services it provides, with three key economic sectors ? construction, agriculture, and food and drink ? all highly dependent on it. Natural capital investment, including restoration of carbon-rich habitats and climate friendly agriculture, is recognized to be among the five most important fiscal recovery policies, which offer high economic multipliers and positive climate impact. Despite this urgent moral, economic and environmental imperative, nature is in a state of crisis. The five main direct drivers of biodiversity loss ? changes in land and sea use, overexploitation, climate change, pollution, and invasive alien species ? are making nature disappear quickly. In the last four decades, global wildlife populations fell by 60% as a result of human activities.
Biodiversity loss and ecosystem collapse are one of the biggest threats facing humanity in the next decade. the headline ambition to ensure that by 2050 all of the world?s ecosystems are restored, resilient, and adequately protected.
The Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 revolves around three pillars: (i) protecting and restoring nature in the EU, by consolidating a coherent and effective network of PAs and restoring degraded habitats; (ii) enabling a new governance framework to ensure co-responsibility and co-ownership by all relevant actors in meeting the biodiversity commitments, including setting up new financial opportunities; and (iii) adopting a global biodiversity agenda, to strengthen the contribution of the EU towards halting global biodiversity loss and minimizing externalities of EU use of resources and consumption on other biodiversity-rich areas of the planet.
It aims to ensure that Europe's biodiversity will be on the path to recovery by 2030 for the benefit of people, the planet, the climate and our economy, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and with the objectives of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. It addresses the five main drivers of biodiversity loss, sets out an enhanced governance framework to fill remaining gaps, ensures the full implementation of EU legislation, and pulls together all existing efforts. To put biodiversity on the path to recovery by 2030, we need to step up the protection and restoration of nature. This should be done by improving and widening our network of protected areas and by developing an ambitious EU Nature Restoration Plan and building a truly coherent Trans-European Nature Network.



Strengths and weaknesses of past conservation policies and practice in the European Union, as well as opportunities and challenges for conservation in the coming decade (Environmental Science and Policy 127 (2022) 263?271, Hermoso V. et al, The EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030: Opportunities and challenges on the path towards biodiversity recovery)

In this spirit, at least 30% of the land and 30% of the sea should be protected in the EU. at least one third of protected areas ? representing 10% of EU land and 10% of EU sea ? should be strictly protected, at least one third of protected areas ? representing 10% of EU land and 10% of EU sea ? should be strictly protected. Significant areas of other carbon-rich ecosystems, such as peatlands, grasslands, wetlands, mangroves and seagrass meadows should also be strictly protected. Designations should either help to complete the Natura 2000 network or be under national protection schemes. In order to have a truly coherent and resilient Trans-European Nature Network it will be important to set up ecological corridors to prevent genetic isolation, allow for species migration, and maintain and enhance healthy ecosystems. In this context, investments in green and blue infrastructure are important. Member States had until the end of 2023 to demonstrate significant progress in legally designating new protected areas and integrating ecological corridors. On this basis, the Commission will assess by 2024 whether the EU is on track to meet its 2030 targets.
Main objectives are:
-Strengthening the EU legal framework for nature restoration
To reverse biodiversity loss, the world needs to be more ambitious on nature restoration. With a new EU Nature Restoration Plan:
* Proposal for legally binding EU nature restoration targets to restore degraded ecosystems, in particular those with the most potential to capture and store carbon and to prevent and reduce the impact of natural disasters.
* Request for Member States to ensure no deterioration in conservation trends and status of all protected habitats and species by 2030.
-Bringing nature back to agricultural land
It is important that farmers support and incentivize the transition to fully sustainable practices. To support the long-term sustainability of both nature and farming, this strategy will work in tandem with the new Farm to Fork Strategy and the new Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). Commission will take action to reduce by 50% the overall use of ? and risk from ? chemical pesticides by 2030 and reduce by 50% the use of more hazardous pesticides by 2030. The decline of genetic diversity must also be reversed, including the use of traditional varieties of crops and breeds.
-Addressing land take and restoring soil ecosystems
It will be determined efforts to protect soil fertility, reduce soil erosion and increase soil organic matter. This should be done by adopting sustainable soil management practices.
-Increasing the quantity of forests and improving their health and resilience.
The EU must increase the quantity, quality and resilience of its forests, conforming to dedicated EU Forest Strategy. roadmap for planting at least 3 billion additional trees in the EU by 2030.



-Win-win solutions for energy generation
There will be new sustainability criteria on forest biomass to be used for energy production.
-Restoring the good environmental status of marine ecosystems 
Restored and properly protected marine ecosystems will bring substantial health, social and economic benefits to coastal communities. Marine resources must be harvested sustainably and there must be zero-tolerance for illegal practices. 
-Restoring freshwater ecosystems
At least 25,000 km of rivers will be restored into free-flowing rivers by 2030 through the removal of primarily obsolete barriers and the restoration of floodplains and wetlands. 
-Greening urban and peri-urban areas
To bring nature back to cities and reward community action, the Commission calls on European cities of at least 20,000 inhabitants to develop ambitious Urban Greening Plans.
-Reducing pollution
Biodiversity is suffering from the release of nutrients, chemical pesticides, pharmaceuticals, hazardous chemicals, urban and industrial wastewater, and other waste including litter and plastics. All of these pressures must be reduced. That is why a new EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability will be put forward along with a Zero Pollution Action Plan for Air, Water and Soil. This will result in the reduction of use of fertilizers by at least 20%.
-Addressing invasive alien species
The implementation of the EU Invasive Alien Species Regulation; decrease the number of Red List species they threaten by 50%.


Main Strategies for biodiversity conservation

EU Nature Restoration Plan: key commitments by 2030:
1. Legally binding EU nature restoration targets proposed in 2021, subject to an impact assessment. By 2030, significant areas of degraded and carbon-rich ecosystems are restored; habitats and species show no deterioration in conservation trends and status; and at least 30% reach favorable conservation status or at least show a positive trend.
2. The decline in pollinators is reversed.
3. The risk and use of chemical pesticides is reduced by 50% and the use of more hazardous pesticides is reduced by 50%.
4. At least 10% of agricultural area is under high-diversity landscape features.
5. At least 25% of agricultural land is under organic farming management, and the uptake of agro-ecological practices is significantly increased.
6. Three billion new trees are planted in the EU, in full respect of ecological principles.
7. Significant progress has been made in the remediation of contaminated soil sites.
8. At least 25,000 km of free-flowing rivers are restored.
9. There is a 50% reduction in the number of Red List species threatened by invasive alien species.
10. The losses of nutrients from fertilizers are reduced by 50%, resulting in the reduction of the use of fertilizers by at least 20%.
11. Cities with at least 20,000 inhabitants have an ambitious Urban Greening Plan.
12. No chemical pesticides are used in sensitive areas such as EU urban green areas.
13. The negative impacts on sensitive species and habitats, including on the seabed through fishing and extraction activities, are substantially reduced to achieve good environmental status.
14. The by-catch of species is eliminated or reduced to a level that allows species recovery and conservation.


II. ENABLING TRANSFORMATIVE CHANGE
a. A new governance framework
The Commission will put in place a monitoring and review mechanism. This will include a clear set of agreed indicators and will enable regular progress assessment and set out corrective action if necessary.
b. Stepping up implementation and enforcement of EU environmental legislation
As regards the Birds and Habitats Directives, enforcement will focus on completing the Natura 2000 network, the effective management of all sites, species-protection provisions, and species and habitats that show declining trends.
c. Building on an integrated and whole-of-society approach
-Business for biodiversity
The Commission will help to build a European Business for Biodiversity movement, taking inspiration from recent initiatives67 and making this movement an integral part of the European Climate Pact.
-Investments, pricing and taxation
At least ?20 billion a year should be unlocked for spending on nature. A significant proportion of the 25% of the EU budget dedicated to climate action will be invested on biodiversity and nature-based solutions. The ?user pays? and ?polluter pays? principles have to be applied to prevent and correct environmental degradation.
-Measuring and integrating the value of nature
It will be done by measuring the environmental footprint of products and organizations, including through life-cycle approaches and natural capital accounting.
-Improving knowledge, education and skills
The new Skills Agenda will play a key role in the transition to a green economy and the fight against biodiversity loss. The future Horizon Europe program will include a long-term strategic research agenda for biodiversity.

III. THE EUROPEAN UNION FOR AN AMBITIOUS GLOBAL BIODIVERSITY AGENDA
The Commission proposes the EU ensures that the post-2020 global framework includes, at a minimum, the elements outlined below:
*?Overarching global goals for biodiversity for 2050, in line with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the vision of ?living in harmony with nature?. The ambition should be that, by 2050, all of the world?s ecosystems are restored, resilient, and adequately protected. The world should commit to the net-gain principle to give nature back more than it takes.
The world should commit to no human-induced extinction of species, at minimum where avoidable.
* An enabling framework to bring the ambition to life, will be across areas such as finance, capacity, research, innovation and technology.
*?Fair and equitable sharing of the benefits from the use of genetic resources linked to biodiversity.
*?A principle of equality
* International cooperation, neighborhood policy and resource mobilization

Table 1
Summary of action recommendations for different EU biodiversity conservation policy instruments.

EU policy instrumentDevelopment needs for effective biodiversity conservationBiodiversity Strategy* Promote Private to Public Partnerships
* Promote Payment for established provisionMarine Strategy Framework Directive. 
Maritime Spatial Planning Framework Directive* Further integrate biodiversity conservation into maritime sectoral policies
* Improve coordination among Member States for addressing transboundary threats to biodiversity (e.g., marine litter)
* Improve ecological coherence of marine protected areas when planning marine spatial plansCommon Agriculture Policy* Incorporate spatial planning in target setting and implementation
* Promote result-based payments
* Promote funds to protect High Nature Value Farmland Common Fisheries Policy* Shift from subsidies to result-based payments
* Evaluate the contribution of Fisheries Restricted Areas towards the achievement of biodiversity targets
* Promote ecosystem-based management measures outside marine protected areas that have conservation benefitsEuropean Green Deal* Adequate spatial planning to minimize conflicts (e.g energy production vs biodiversity)a) European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development. 
b) European Maritime and Fisheries Fund. 
c) European Regional Development Fund. 
d) European Maritime Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund* Earmark funds for conservation
* Dedicate funds for compensation of fishers/farmers and other sea and land users that contribute to threat managementAarhus Convention* Facilitate public participation
IV. SOLVING CONFLICT BETWEEN AGRICULTURE AND BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION
Conflicts between agriculture and biodiversity conservation in Europe are increasing, due to multiple demands from agricultural ecosystems, including a growing need for high quality and good-value agricultural products, as well as the provision of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Currents trends such as globalization, European policies, and global change, such as climate change and nitrogen atmospheric deposition are potentially driving the emergence or evolution of biodiversity conflicts in Europe. 



These trends are interwoven with continuing debates around land-sparing and land-sharing, that often lead to conflicting perspectives and social dynamics that influence how local actors interact with each other over agriculture. Whilst some strategies have been put in place to address the potential competition between agriculture and biodiversity, such as reglementary and market-based mechanisms, and non-monetary voluntary approaches, these need to be reflected upon and improved for a future agriculture where the negative impacts of conflicts are minimized.
Agriculture covers approximately 40% of the EU land surface area (Eurostat, 2018), producing biodiverse habitats, but is also considered to be the main driver of environmental degradation, with land abandonment.
The adoption of more intensive, mechanized, and chemically based farming production techniques are further putting biodiversity under pressure. The frequent trade-off between productive agriculture and farmland biodiversity has led to biodiversity conflicts.
The biodiversity decline continues to be insufficiently addressed in the past and current CAP and no sufficient structural mitigation has been provided. It seems likely that farmers will still be under increased and conflicting pressure from market and conservation drivers. In relation to the land sharing and land sparing debate, a useful strategy for addressing biodiversity conflict and optimal landscapes could be a mix of those land-use strategies. 
It will be important for conflicts between agriculture and biodiversity solving to recognize multi-faceted symptoms of past and current underlying factors that go beyond specific disputes around biodiversity conflict. It is also necessary that regional and local trade-offs between biodiversity conservation and yield improvement for the different land-use strategies are made transparent and are negotiated. Finally, explicit and measurable conservation targets have to be integrated into local, regional and international agricultural policies to avoid biodiversity conservation being considered as a by-product of other policies, such as on sustainable intensification.
In addition, continued use of existing and new strategies used to address the relationship between biodiversity and agriculture (reglementary, market-based, voluntary non-monetary and participative process), all highlight the importance of adopting a structured and partnership approach that involves researchers, managers and stakeholders, and includes monitoring, adaptive management, economic and social assessments, as well as the development of a conflict reconciliation plan at an early stage will be essential?especially as land use changes emerge based on changing social structures. 
New approaches such as agroecology, partnerships and conflict transformation all emphasize the need for stronger bridges between practice, science and politics, creating a movement from ?working with others? to ?working together? that tackles deep rooted dimensions of conflict, including power asymmetries and dynamics, with conflict seen as natural and a positive opportunity for transformation. In Europe, both the survival of farming and biodiversity are closely interrelated, and working on common ground and shared vision will be essential for the future of agriculture. 


Solving conflict between agriculture and biodiversity conservation in Europe
(L. Lecuyer et al., Advances in Ecological Research, Volume 65, 4-20, 2021 Elsevier Ltd)

V. OPPORTUNITIES TO CONSERVE AND RESTORE BIODIVERSITY IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS THROUGH BIOECONOMY PRACTICES

The bioeconomy can be defined as "the production, utilization, conservation, and regeneration of biological resources, including related knowledge, science, technology, and innovation, to provide sustainable solutions (information, products, processes and services) within and across all economic sectors and enable a transformation to a sustainable economy" (FAO, 2021).The bioeconomy covers all economic sectors that rely on biological resources, from primary production (crops, livestock, forestry, fishery and aquaculture) to related processing and service industries (food, feed, paper, textiles, built environment and construction, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, energy). Circular bioeconomy closes the biological resources loop and maximizes the use of residual streams from agriculture, food processing and biobased industries, by reusing, recycling or composting waste materials and converting them into useful products.


A new bioeconomy model can support biodiversity

Bioeconomy is a knowledge-based economy, which can harness the power of biosciences and technologies across all sectors to create an innovative and sustainable economic model, which is enhanced by and benefits from traditional practices and knowledge. However, bioeconomy activities are not necessarily sustainable per se, as the development of an economy that is based on biological resources faces several tradeoffs. To address these trade-offs to bring about win-win situations, it is essential that sustainability and circularity criteria are embedded in bioeconomy frameworks. 
Main objective is to ensure that development of national and regional bioeconomy policies and strategies takes due account of sustainability criteria. It is to cover all three dimensions of sustainability (environmental, economic, social) and the governance dimension.
Bioeconomy embraces different bio-based value chains and economic activities that highly depend on biodiversity and ecosystem services. Therefore, biodiversity conservation, protection, sustainable use and regeneration, as well as ecosystem health, are essential components of successful bioeconomy strategies and policies. 
There are multiple bioeconomy practices with direct and indirect positive impacts on biodiversity, addressing ? often simultaneously? the five principal drivers of biodiversity loss (land use change, overexploitation of natural resources, pollution, invasive alien species and climate change). 
Bioeconomy products or practices (such as biofertilizers, biopesticides, bio-based plastics, bioremediation or microbiome innovations) can help to reduce soil and water pollution and health risks by decreasing use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, which are identified among major causes of biodiversity loss.
? A sustainable and circular bioeconomy promotes bioprocesses and circular value chains that allow for more sustainable production patterns that produce more with fewer resources and turn waste into valuable byproducts, thereby reducing pressure on our ecosystems.
? The bioeconomy also harnesses traditional and indigenous knowledge, combined with the latest advances in biosciences and innovation, including multi-omics, data and DNA sequencing, to enhance biodiversity knowledge and in situ and ex situ conservation. Combining tradition and innovation, the bioeconomy can empower local communities with diversified income opportunities, while making sustainable use of biodiversity and related traditional knowledge.
? The benefits arising from the sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity and related traditional knowledge should be shared fairly and equitably within the bioeconomy, in particular local communities.
There are several ways in which bioeconomy can support biodiversity. For instance, sustainable bioeconomy practices related to afforestation and reforestation can reduce habitat loss and restore ecosystems. Similarly, bioeconomy science and innovation are supporting developments on how to harness the potential of microorganisms and the incredibly diverse microbial environments in which they operate (microbiomes). Microbiomes perform essential functions for soils, crops, animals, forests, humans and their related ecosystems. Microbial-based strategies are an eco-friendly approach to restore degraded ecosystems and enhance biodiversity, while improving the provision of ecosystem services.
Bioproducts, such as biopesticides, biofertilizers, bio stimulants and bio-based pest control, can contribute towards reducing environmental pollution and health risks from fertilizer and pesticide use. Improving the soil and plant microbiome is a beneficial activity for a healthier environment. Moreover, bioeconomy maximizes the use of residual streams from agriculture, food processing and forest-based industries, turning them into a range of value-added products, thereby reducing the amount of landfilled waste and pollution, which are a serious threat for biodiversity.



Bioscience, biotechnology, and bioinformatics innovations help in the collection, handling, storage and supply of biological materials, including genetic resources, which are essential to enhance biodiversity knowledge and for ex situ conservation.



Sustainable bioeconomy practices reduce habitat loss, through the restoration of healthy ecosystems that protect and enhance biodiversity.
(Prakash, S., Liquete, C., Biodiversity conservation. A knowledge synthesis and analysis of biodiversity conservation measures highlighting the relevant EU policies, projects and initiatives, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2023)



Grid cells within the Romanian terrestrial Natura 2000 network
(Miu I. V., Rozylowicz L, Popescu V. D., Anastasiu P., Identification of areas of very high biodiversity value to achieve the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 key commitments. PeerJ 8:e, 10067, 2020)




