

MODULE II. GREEN / SUSTAINABLE ENERGY

EU target. There are two major objectives: (a) Increasing Energy Efficiency. (b) Replacing the fossil fuels use to generate energy by green / sustainable sources of energy
The revised Energy Efficiency Directive (EU/2023/1791), published in the Official Journal on 20 September 2023, significantly raises the EU?s ambition on energy efficiency.
It establishes ?energy efficiency first? as a fundamental principle of EU energy policy, giving it legal-standing for the first time. In practical terms, this means that energy efficiency must be considered by EU countries in all relevant policy and major investment decisions taken in the energy and non-energy sectors.
The 2023 revision of the directive follows a proposal for a recast directive on energy efficiency put forward by the Commission in July 2021, as part of the EU Green Deal package. The 2021 proposal was further enhanced as part of the REPower EU plan, presented by the Commission.
The 2023 revised directive raises the EU energy efficiency target, making it binding for EU countries to collectively ensure an additional 11.7% reduction in energy consumption by 2030, compared to the 2020 reference scenario projections. As a result, overall EU energy consumption by 2030 should not exceed 992.5 million tons of oil equivalent (Mtoe) for primary energy and 763 Mtoe for final energy.
The revised directive more than doubles the annual energy savings obligation (Article 8) by 2028. This is one of the key policy instruments of the directive to meet the headline target and to drive energy savings in end-use sectors, such as buildings, industry and transport.
Support to new high-efficiency cogeneration units using natural gas and connected to district heating in efficient district heating and cooling systems will only be possible until 2030, whereas any other fossil fuel use will be banned for new heat generation capacities in such systems. EU countries will also have to promote local heating and cooling plans in large municipalities having populations above 45 000.
GREEN / SUSTAINABLE ENERGY: DEFINITIONS 
A sunburst chart is showing the share of different types of fuel in electricity generation in the EU: In 2022, 39.4% of electricity was generated from renewable energy sources, 38.7% from fossil fuels and 21.9% from nuclear power.
Fig. 1. Power production in the European Union 2020-2022, by fuel (Published by Statista Research Department, Oct 17, 2023)


Fig. 2. The structure of renewable sources generating electricity in EU in 2020 (Source: Eurostat)
People often use the terms ?sustainable? and ?renewable? interchangeably. However, there is a difference between the two: the possibility of replenishment.
Sustainable energy, as highlighted above, is theoretically inexhaustible. It cannot be depleted because sustainable energy sources don?t need to be replenished. For example, think of the sun or wind. Neither resource needs to be created or replaced.
On the other hand, renewable energy is theoretically exhaustible ? it uses resources from the earth that can naturally be replenished, such as crops and biomatter. A renewable energy source like bioenergy uses biological masses (e.g. agricultural byproducts like straw and manure) to create energy. Conversion of waste into value-added products such as energy transforms a potential environmental problem into a sustainable solution. The topic Energy from Waste: Production and Storage focuses on the conversion of waste from various sources for use in energy production and storage applications. It provides the state-of-the-art in developing advanced materials and chemicals for energy applications using wastes and discusses the various treatment processes and technologies. 
* Covers synthesis of usable materials from various types of waste and their application in energy production and storage.
* Presents an overview and applications of wastes for green energy production and storage 
* Provides fundamentals of electrochemical behavior and understanding of energy devices such as fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, and solar cells.
* Elaborates on advanced technologies used to convert waste into green biochemical energy
In the light of such considerations, converting food, agriculture or municipal waste to useful energy is becoming a reasonable and economic topic. The opportunity of applying food waste as a suitable feedstock to producing biofuels is in progress. The conversion of waste is achieved via biological treatments involving composting, anaerobic digestion, and fermentation; there are also thermal or thermochemical technologies involving incineration, pyrolysis, gasification, plasma treatment, and hydrothermal carbonization; transesterification; and bio electrochemical treatments. 
Sustainable energy includes any energy source that cannot be depleted and can remain viable forever. It does not need to be renewed or replenished; sustainable energy meets our demand for energy without any risk of going bad or running out. This is why sustainable energy is the answer to our energy needs.
Furthermore, sustainable energy doesn?t harm the environment (or at most, there is a minimal risk), increase climate change or cost a heavy price. Although there is a cost associated with creating and building ways to capture sustainable energy, the energy sources themselves are typically free.
Fossil fuels (e.g. coal, natural gas and oil) are not only harmful to the planet when burned daily for energy, but they?re also unsustainable as finite resources. Sustainability refers to the concept that all people can meet their basic needs infinitely, without compromising future generations. Sustainability in terms of energy embraces the same principles.


Fig. 3. Green energy is generated from infinite sources that do not produce carbon emissions or harm the environment. 
Sustainable energy is generated from sources that replenish themselves faster than they are depleted. Knowing the differences between the two aids in the fight against global climate change. Green and sustainable energy sources are alternatives to fossil fuels (e.g., coal, oil, natural gas) that aid in the fight against global climate change because they help curtail GHG emissions.
Both green and sustainable energy sources are in infinite supply, but only green energy sources have the added benefit of not producing GHG emissions or negatively impacting the environment.?
Basically, all green energy is sustainable energy, but not all sustainable energy is green energy. Green energy comes from sources that provide the highest environmental benefit, whereas sustainable sources can be harvested indefinitely.?


Fig. 4. Characterization of green versus sustainable versus renewable versus clean energy? types

Green energy is a more specific category of renewable energy that provides higher environmental benefits than renewables. It can also reduce carbon footprints, air pollution, and water environmental costs. However, green energy possesses geographic limitations and offers intermittent production peaks depending on weather conditions.
Sustainable energy aims to limit GHG emissions while preserving the natural integrity of the environment. An energy source can be sustainable as long as the rate of resource harvest stays below the rate of natural resource replenishment. Harvesting, utilizing, operating, and building infrastructure are all areas where the energies could become unsustainable.?
Green energy is important for the environment as it replaces the negative effects of fossil fuels with more environmentally-friendly alternatives. Derived from natural resources, green energy is also often renewable and clean, meaning that they emit no or few greenhouse gases and are often readily available.
Even when the full life cycle of a green energy source is taken into consideration, they release far less greenhouse gases than fossil fuels, as well as few or low levels of air pollutants. This is not just good for the planet but is also better for the health of people and animals that have to breathe the air.
Green energy can also lead to stable energy prices as these sources are often produced locally and are not as affected by geopolitical crisis, price spikes or supply chain disruptions. The economic benefits also include job creation in building the facilities that often serve the communities where the workers are employed. Renewable energy saw the creation of 11 million jobs worldwide in 2018, with this number set to grow as we strive to meet targets such as net zero.
Due to the local nature of energy production through sources like solar and wind power, the energy infrastructure is more flexible and less dependent on centralized sources that can lead to disruption as well as being less resilient to weather related climate change.
Many industries are investigating green solutions and here are a few examples:
Heating and Cooling in Buildings
Green energy solutions are being used for buildings ranging from large office blocks to people?s homes. These include solar water heaters, biomass fueled boilers and direct heat from geothermal, as well as cooling systems powered by renewable sources.
Industrial Processes
Renewable heat for industrial processes can be run using biomass or renewable electricity. Hydrogen is now a large provider of renewable energy for the cement, iron, steel and chemical industries.
Transport
Sustainable biofuels and renewable electricity are growing in use for transportation across multiple industry sectors. Automotive is an obvious example as electrification advances to replace fossil fuels, but aerospace and construction are other areas that are actively investigating electrification.
Green energy has the capacity to replace fossil fuels in the future, however it may require varied production from different means to achieve this.
Can It Be Economically Viable?
Understanding the economic viability of green energy requires a comparison with fossil fuels. The fact is that as easily-reached fossil resources begin to run out, the cost of this type of energy will only increase with scarcity.
At the beginning of the 21st century, about 80 percent of the world?s energy supply was derived from fossil fuels such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas. Fossil fuels are finite resources; most estimates suggest that the proven reserves of oil are large enough to meet global demand at least until the middle of the 21st century. Fossil fuel combustion has a number of negative environmental consequences. Fossil-fueled power plants emit air pollutants such as sulfur dioxide, particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, and toxic chemicals (heavy metals: mercury, chromium, and arsenic), and mobile sources, such as fossil-fueled vehicles, emit nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and particulate matter. Exposure to these pollutants can cause heart disease, asthma, and other human health problems. In addition, emissions from fossil fuel combustion are responsible for acid rain, which has led to the acidification of many lakes and consequent damage to aquatic life, leaf damage in many forests, and the production of smog in or near many urban areas. Furthermore, the burning of fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide (CO2), one of the main greenhouse gases that cause global warming.
At the same time as the fossil fuels become more expensive, the cost of greener energy sources is falling. Other factors also work in favor of green energy, such as the ability to produce relatively inexpensive localized energy solutions, such as solar farms. The interest, investment and development of green energy solutions is bringing costs down as we continue to build up our knowledge and are able to build on past breakthroughs.
In the following part the renewable energy solutions will be developed, meaning green and sustainable or only renewable. It is usable energy derived from replenishable sources such as the Sun (solar energy), wind (wind power), rivers (hydroelectric power), hot springs (geothermal energy), tides (tidal power), biomass (biofuels), green hydrogen by the electrolysis of water, and solid wastes biotransformation into energy by circular bioeconomy solutions.
This last subject will be developed in the next module dedicated to circular economy & bioeconomy.
There are important benefits of renewable energy:
1. Improves Public Health
The burning of fossil fuels in coal and natural gas plants is directly tied with many serious public health issues, such as neurological damage, cancer, heart attacks, breathing problems and premature death. When fossil fuels are burned for energy, they release air and water pollution that negatively affect surrounding communities and environments.
However, all of these associated risks can be eliminated by switching to sustainable energy. Sustainable energy sources typically emit no air or water pollutants that can harm public health. They also don?t make a negative impact or strain on local water resources. Meanwhile, coal mining, natural gas drilling and thermal power plants all compete with local agriculture, drinking water and other important community water needs for resources.
2. Creates Local Jobs
Sustainable energy can also help fuel your local communities. Since most facilities and sustainable energy infrastructure must be built locally or in the same county, making the switch helps create jobs and improve the economy. Instead of spending more money importing energy from fossil fuel companies, that money is spent on materials and workmanship to maintain sustainable energy facilities.
3. Decreases Your Carbon Footprint?
We?re all doing our best to reduce our negative impact on the environment, but there is only so much each person can do. Sustainable energy, such as wind and solar energy, creates zero carbon emissions that can harm the atmosphere and contribute to global warming. It offsets the need for fossil fuels, which are actively increasing climate change and polluting our earth.
Simply switching your own home?s energy source can help cut the environmental impact you and your family have on the planet ? and eliminate your dependence on fossil fuels.
4. Long-term Cost is More Affordable
Sustainable energy can make a huge long-term difference to the electricity and energy costs of our homes and businesses ? no matter where you are. Not only are they easily available for little to no cost, but they?re much more cost-effective than traditional energy resources, such as power plants. Making the financial leap to wind, solar or any other sustainable energy source may seem daunting at first because of installation costs, but the long-term investment pays off in just a few years. In fact, sustainable energy costs decrease each and every year. Depending on your country or state, you may even get tax reductions for choosing sustainable energy. Ultimately, you could end up saving exponentially just by making the switch to a sustainable energy system like solar panels.
5. Energy Security
Sustainable energy is by definition the most reliable form of energy. It will never deplete and can remove our reliance on imported fossil fuels, which are growing more expensive and less accessible. Sustainable energy also helps to conserve the planet?s natural resources and reduce the pollution associated with unsustainable energy.
The economic efficiency
Currently, wind farms are seen as the most efficient source of green energy as it requires less refining and processing than the production of, for example, solar panels. Advances in composites technology and testing has helped improve the life-span and therefore the energy cost of wind turbines. However, the same can be said of solar panels, which are also seeing a great deal of development.
Renewable energy sources are currently ranked as follows in efficiency (although this may change as developments continue):
1. Wind Power
2. Geothermal
3. Hydropower
4. Nuclear (to remind: clean energy, as a matter of fact)
5. Solar Power
For the other types of renewable energy sources, the comparison is under scrutiny, depending on the technological advancement.
Renewable energy sources accounted for nearly 20 percent of global energy consumption at the beginning of the 21st century, largely from traditional uses of biomass such as wood for heating and cooking. By 2015 about 16 percent of the world?s total electricity came from large hydroelectric power plants, whereas other types of renewable energy (such as solar, wind, and geothermal) accounted for 6 percent of total electricity generation. Some energy analysts consider nuclear power to be a form of renewable energy because of its low carbon emissions; nuclear power generated 10.6 percent of the world?s electricity in 2015.
Growth in wind power exceeded 20 percent and photovoltaics grew at 30 percent annually in the 1990s, and renewable energy technologies continued to expand throughout the early 21st century. Between 2001 and 2017 world total installed wind power capacity increased by a factor of 22, growing from 23,900 to 539,581 megawatts. Photovoltaic capacity also expanded, increasing by 50 percent in 2016 alone. The European Union (EU), which produced an estimated 6.38 percent of its energy from renewable sources in 2005, adopted a goal in 2007 to raise that figure to 20 percent by 2020. By 2016 some 17 percent of the EU?s energy came from renewable sources. The goal also included plans to cut emissions of carbon dioxide by 20 percent and to ensure that 10 percent of all fuel consumption comes from biofuels. The EU was well on its way to achieving those targets by 2017. Between 1990 and 2016 the countries of the EU reduced carbon emissions by 23 percent and increased biofuel production to 5.5 percent of all fuels consumed in the region.

Fig. 5. Barriers to renewable energy development
Technical barriers are mainly concerned with the technology to harvest available and viable renewable energy resources (RER). This starts from RERs availability, feasibility and viability, infrastructure, grid connectivity and capacity, the human factor of skilled labor, and technical expertise. 
The term variable renewable energy (VRE) is usually used to refer to solar and wind RERs, due to their high intermittent nature, compared to other RERs. In this regard, storage energy systems (SESs) have been widely viewed as an ultimate solution to smooth the RERs power generation scheme.
The European Commission has set up a fair transition mechanism to finance the green reform to a climate-neutral economy. This mechanism consists of three main sources of funding: (1) A Just Transition Fund, which will be financed with new Community funds of ?7.5 billion, in addition to the Commission?s proposal for the next long-term budget of the European Union, (2) a special regime of fair transition within the framework of Invest EU for the mobilization of investments and finding new sources of growth, and (3) a public sector lending mechanism in cooperation with the European Investment Bank.
WIND POWER
By 2016 wind was contributing approximately 4 percent of the world?s total electricity. Electricity generation by wind has been increasing dramatically because of concerns over the cost of petroleum and the effects of fossil fuel combustion on the climate and environment. From 2007 to 2016, for example, total installed wind power capacity quintupled from 95 gigawatts to 487 gigawatts worldwide. In 2016 Denmark generated the largest percentage of its electricity from wind (nearly 38 percent). The wind power industry estimates that the world could feasibly generate nearly 20 percent of its total electricity from wind power by 2030. Various estimates put the cost of wind energy as low as 2?6 cents per kilowatt-hour, depending on the location. This is comparable to the cost of coal, natural gas, and other forms of fossil energy, which ranges between 5 and 17 cents per kilowatt-hour.
Challenges to the large-scale implementation of wind energy include siting requirements such as wind availability, aesthetic and environmental concerns, and land availability. Wind farms are most cost-effective in areas with consistent strong winds; however, these areas are not necessarily near large population centres. Thus, power lines and other components of electrical distribution systems must have the capacity to transmit this electricity to consumers. In addition, since wind is an intermittent and inconsistent power source, storing power may be necessary. Public advocacy groups have raised concerns about the potential disruptions that wind farms may have on wildlife and overall aesthetics. Although wind generators have been blamed for injuring and killing birds, experts have shown that modern turbines have a small effect on bird populations. The National Audubon Society, a large environmental group based in the United States and focused on the conservation of birds and other wildlife, is strongly in favour of wind power, provided that wind farms are appropriately sited to minimize the impacts on migrating bird populations and important wildlife habitat.
In the case of wind energy, the most common and widely applied conversion approach is to convert wind energy into electrical energy using wind turbines coupled with an electrical generator. 

Fig. 5. Wind turbine structure (Source: Encyclopedia Britanica)
While large-scale wind turbines are a mature technology that can be sited within or close to cities where good wind resources are identified, small-scale wind turbines sited on or near buildings are still emerging. Small wind turbines are currently more costly and less efficient than large ones and will require further development if they are to make a noticeable contribution to urban energy supply. 
A major challenge for urban small wind will continue to be proper siting and cost control. Due to their smaller scale and relative cost, long-term wind speed monitoring can be impractical for these projects. 
Looking to the future, as wind energy and other forms of variable renewable generation increase, flexible energy resources will likely be needed to keep supply and demand on the grid in balance. Energy storage technologies and demand response will be among the options for providing this flexibility in a low-carbon energy system. Batteries, flywheels, compressed air and other forms of energy storage may be utilized to store renewable power when it is in excess for future use when demand would otherwise exceed supply. However, the viability of energy storage as a grid balancing solution will depend on the cost of these technologies as compared to available alternatives ?Smart grid? investments in advanced meters and appliances capable of sending and receiving signals to control electricity demand in real time are one such alternative. Indeed, as renewable supplies that fluctuate with changes in wind or solar availability become ubiquitous, it will become more important that the electric grid be an intelligent and dynamic energy system, capable of utilizing a number of different options and techniques for controlling supply and demand.
Despite the fact that wind energy technology is highly popular, there are certain issues that limit its use. The efficiency and practical usability of wind energy technology depend on the reliability and lifetime of wind turbines. The repair and maintenance of wind turbines are typically quite expensive and labor consuming.
Issues with regard to the environment and public perception are also important:
Noise pollution: Noise is disturbing for some people. There are two main sources of noise from a wind turbine ? mechanical noise from the gearbox and generator, and aerodynamic noise from the rotor blades. Aerodynamic noise is the major component of the total noise and resembles the swish sound created by a helicopter. At 400 m downwind, the turbine noise can be as high as 60 dB, which is comparable to the noise level from an air conditioner or dishwasher. However, the noise from wind farms is far below the threshold of pain, which is 140 dB. Furthermore noise has been reduced substantially with the advent of new and improved designed wind turbines.
Aesthetics: Some people perceive wind farms as ugly for the landscape, forcing developers to install them in remote areas, including offshore.
Bird collisions: Some instances of birds colliding with the rotating blades are reported. However, the problem can be reduced to a great extent with newer turbines being designed with lower blade speeds.
Ice accumulation: In cold weather regions, ice can accumulate on the blades. When the turbine spins, the ice can be dislodged and such projectiles endanger the public and structures in the vicinity. In some models the blades are heated to avoid the ice from accumulating on them.
It is to work with industry partners to increase the performance and reliability of next-generation wind technologies while lowering the cost of wind energy. The office's research efforts have helped to increase the average capacity factor (a measure of power plant productivity) from 22% for wind turbines installed before 1998 to an average of nearly 35% today, up from 30% in 2000. Wind energy costs have been reduced from over 55 cents (current dollars) per kilowatt-hour (kWh) in 1980 to an average of under 3 cents per kWh in the USA today. To ensure future industry growth, wind industry technology must continue to evolve, building on earlier successes to further improve reliability, increase capacity factors, and reduce costs.
SOLAR ENERGY
Solar energy is determined by the radiation from the Sun capable of producing heat, causing chemical reactions, or generating electricity. The total amount of solar energy incident on Earth is vastly in excess of the world?s current and anticipated energy requirements. If suitably harnessed, this highly diffused source has the potential to satisfy all future energy needs. In the 21st century solar energy is expected to become increasingly attractive as a renewable energy source because of its inexhaustible supply and its nonpolluting character.
Solar energy is available everywhere and is already commercially applied in several sectors, either solar thermal or electrical energy. The widespread of solar photo-voltaic (PV) systems requires efficient energy storage systems. Batteries are the most affordable energy storage that are available in different sizes.

Fig. 6. Reflection and absorption of solar energy (Source: Merriam-Webster Inc.)
The Sun is an extremely powerful energy source, and sunlight is by far the largest source of energy received by Earth, but its intensity at Earth?s surface is actually quite low. This is essentially because of the enormous radial spreading of radiation from the distant Sun. A relatively minor additional loss is due to Earth?s atmosphere and clouds, which absorb or scatter as much as 54 percent of the incoming sunlight. The sunlight that reaches the ground consists of nearly 50 percent visible light, 45 percent infrared radiation, and smaller amounts of ultraviolet and other forms of electromagnetic radiation.
The potential for solar energy is enormous, since about 200,000 times the world?s total daily electric-generating capacity is received by Earth every day in the form of solar energy. Unfortunately, though solar energy itself is free, the high cost of its collection, conversion, and storage still limits its exploitation in many places. Solar radiation can be converted either into thermal energy (heat) or into electrical energy, though the former is easier to accomplish.



Fig. 7. Photo-voltaic power potential on Earth (Source: Encyclopedia Britanica)
a) Thermal energy

Fig. 8. A building roof with flat-plate collectors that capture solar energy to heat air or water.
Among the most common devices used to capture solar energy and convert it to thermal energy are flat-plate collectors, which are used for solar heating applications. Because the intensity of solar radiation at Earth?s surface is so low, these collectors must be large in area. Even in sunny parts of the world?s temperate regions, for instance, a collector must have a surface area of about 40 square meters to gather enough energy to serve the energy needs of one person.
The most widely used flat-plate collectors consist of a blackened metal plate, covered with one or two sheets of glass, that is heated by the sunlight falling on it. This heat is then transferred to air or water, called carrier fluids, that flow past the back of the plate. The heat may be used directly, or it may be transferred to another medium for storage. Flat-plate collectors are commonly used for solar water heaters and house heating. The storage of heat for use at night or on cloudy days is commonly accomplished by using insulated tanks to store the water heated during sunny periods. Such a system can supply a home with hot water drawn from the storage tank, or, with the warmed water flowing through tubes in floors and ceilings, it can provide space heating. Flat-plate collectors typically heat carrier fluids to temperatures ranging from 66 to 93 ?C. The efficiency of such collectors (i.e., the proportion of the energy received that they convert into usable energy) ranges from 20 to 80 percent, depending on the design of the collector.
Another method of thermal energy conversion is found in solar ponds, which are bodies of salt water designed to collect and store solar energy. The heat extracted from such ponds enables the production of chemicals, food, textiles, and other industrial products and can also be used to warm greenhouses, swimming pools, and livestock buildings. Solar ponds are sometimes used to produce electricity through the use of the organic Rankine cycle engine, a relatively efficient and economical means of solar energy conversion, which is especially useful in remote locations. Solar ponds are fairly expensive to install and maintain and are generally limited to warm rural areas.
On a smaller scale, the Sun?s energy can also be harnessed to cook food in specially designed solar ovens. Solar ovens typically concentrate sunlight from over a wide area to a central point, where a black-surfaced vessel converts the sunlight into heat. The ovens are typically portable and require no other fuel inputs.
b) Electricity generation
Solar radiation may be converted directly into electricity by solar cells (photovoltaic cells). In such cells, a small electric voltage is generated when light strikes the junction between a metal and a semiconductor (such as silicon) or the junction between two different semiconductors. The power generated by a single photovoltaic cell is typically only about two watts. By connecting large numbers of individual cells together, however, as in solar-panel arrays, hundreds or even thousands of kilowatts of electric power can be generated in a solar electric plant or in a large household array. The energy efficiency of most present-day photovoltaic cells is only about 15 to 20 percent, and, since the intensity of solar radiation is low to begin with, large and costly assemblies of such cells are required to produce even moderate amounts of power.
When sunlight strikes a solar cell, an electron is freed by the photoelectric effect. The two dissimilar semiconductors possess a natural difference in electric potential (voltage), which causes the electrons to flow through the external circuit, supplying power to the load. The flow of electricity results from the characteristics of the semiconductors and is powered entirely by light striking the cell.


Fig. 9. Photo-voltaic solar cell (Source: Encyclopedia Britanica)
Small photovoltaic cells that operate on sunlight or artificial light have found major use in low-power applications?as power sources for calculators and watches, for example. Larger units have been used to provide power for water pumps and communications systems in remote areas and for weather and communications satellites. Classic crystalline silicon panels and emerging technologies using thin-film solar cells, including building-integrated photovoltaics, can be installed by homeowners and businesses on their rooftops to replace or augment the conventional electric supply.
a) Concentrated solar power plantb) Solar reflector
Fig. 10. Solar power units (Source: Encyclopedia Britanica)
Concentrated solar power plants employ concentrating, or focusing, collectors to concentrate sunlight received from a wide area onto a small blackened receiver, thereby considerably increasing the light?s intensity in order to produce high temperatures. The arrays of carefully aligned mirrors or lenses can focus enough sunlight to heat a target to temperatures of 2,000 ?C or more. This heat can then be used to operate a boiler, which in turn generates steam for a steam turbine electric generator power plant. For producing steam directly, the movable mirrors can be arranged so as to concentrate large amounts of solar radiation upon blackened pipes through which water is circulated and thereby heated.
Solar energy is also used on a small scale for purposes other than those described above. In some countries, for instance, solar energy is used to produce salt from seawater by evaporation. Similarly, solar-powered desalination units transform salt water into drinking water by converting the Sun?s energy to heat, directly or indirectly, to drive the desalination process.
Solar technology has also emerged for the clean and renewable production of hydrogen as an alternative energy source. Mimicking the process of photosynthesis, artificial leaves are silicon-based devices that use solar energy to split water into hydrogen and oxygen, leaving virtually no pollutants. Further work is needed to improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of these devices for industrial use.
With the technological developments in solar panels, the efficiency of commercial modules has reached 12%?22%. The lack of expected improvements in the efficiency of thin-film solar panels has significantly reduced in the market share of these panels. In addition, the increase in the cost of lens and tracking systems in concentrated PV modules has decreased the market share of these systems. Therefore, new studies are carried out to increase cell and module efficiency.
Solar panels can perform a part of our energy needs. Fig. 11 shows the evolution of renewable energy annual installations over the last 11 years. The development of solar energy among renewable energy sources can be seen in this figure. Solar panels have shown an ever-increasing market growth in electricity generation, thanks to their technology and price. In fact, solar energy sees as for approximately 40% of the total renewable electricity generation in 2021.







Fig. 11. Evolution of renewable energy annual installations (global level) (Source: World Bank)

The benefits arising from the installation and operation of solar energy systems are environmental and socioeconomical.
From an environmental point of view, the use of solar energy technologies has several positive implications which include: (a) Reduction of the emission of the greenhouse gasses (mainly CO2, NOx) and of toxic gas emissions (SO2, particulates). (b) Reclamation of degraded land (c) Reduced requirement for transmission lines within the electricity grid (d) Improvement of the water resources quality.
The socioeconomic benefits of solar technologies include: (a) Increased regional/national energy independence. (b) Creation of employment opportunities. (c) Restructuring of energy markets due to penetration of a new technology and the growth of new production activities. (d) Diversification, security, and stability of energy supply. (e) Acceleration of electrification of rural communities in isolated areas
It is worth noting that no artificial project can completely avoid some impact to the environment. The negative environmental aspects of solar energy systems include: (a) Pollution stemming from production, installation, maintenance, and demolition of the systems. (b) Noise during construction. (c) Land displacement (d) Visual intrusion.
Considering a 60% transmittance through the atmospheric cloud cover, 1.05?105 TW reaches the earth?s surface continuously. If the irradiance on only 1% of the earth?s surface could be converted into electric energy with a 10% efficiency, it would provide a resource base of 105 TW, while the total global energy needs for 2050 are projected to be about 25?30 TW. The present state of solar energy technologies is such that single solar cell efficiencies have reached over 20% with concentrating PV at about 40% and solar thermal systems provide efficiencies of 40?60%.
Solar PV panels have come down in cost from about $30 W?1 to about $3 W?1 in the last three decades. At $3 W?1 panel cost, the overall system cost is around $6 W?1, which is still too high for the average consumer. However, there are many off-grid applications where solar PV is already cost-effective. With net metering and governmental incentives, such as feed-in laws and other policies, grid-connected applications such as building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) have become cost-effective. As a result, the worldwide growth in PV production is more than 30% per year (average) during the past 5 years.
Solar thermal power using concentrating solar collectors was the first solar technology that demonstrated its grid power potential. Progress in solar thermal power stalled after that time because of poor policy and lack of R&D. However, the last 5 years have seen a resurgence of interest in this area, and a number of solar thermal power plants around the world are under construction. The cost of power from these plants (which is so far in the range of $0.12?$0.16 kWh?1) has the potential to go down to $0.05 kWh?1 with scale-up and creation of a mass market. An advantage of solar thermal power is that thermal energy can be stored efficiently and fuels such as natural gas or biogas may be used as back-up to ensure continuous operation.
In this volume, emphasis is given to solar thermal systems. Solar thermal systems are nonpolluting and offer significant protection to the environment. The reduction of greenhouse gasses is the main advantage of utilizing solar energy. Therefore, solar thermal systems should be employed whenever possible in order to achieve a sustainable future. 
In terms of technology, solar photovoltaic (PV) is a perfect example of technological advancement. The 3rd generation solar PV cells are currently employed, and they overcome many of the challenges associated with energy efficiency and cost. The advancements in solar PV cells have led to lower costs, less energy-intensive manufacturing processes, and the use of available material resources (i.e., avoiding the use of precious metals). One of the main challenges of PV projects is their connectivity to the power grid, which is mainly due to their intermittent nature.
HYDROPOWER
As the second largest renewable electricity source, hydropower continues to be an important energy source today. According to Eurostat, it accounted in 2021 for 32% of the EU's renewable electricity production and provided 12% of the EU's electricity.

Fig. 12 Hydropower generation in Europe, 2022 (Source: EU Directorate for Environment)

Fig 13. Europe dominated the global market in 2022 (Source: www.precedenceresearch.com)

Fig. 14. Recorded hydropower plants in Europe (Source: European Environmental Agency), 2022
Hydroelectric power (later only called hydropower) is a renewable energy source, where electrical energy is derived from the potential energy of water moving from higher to lower elevations.
Hydroelectric power is electricity produced from generators driven by turbines that convert the potential energy of falling or fast-flowing water into mechanical energy. In the early 21st century, hydroelectric power was the most widely utilized form of renewable energy; in 2019 it accounted for more than 18 percent of the world?s total power generation capacity.
In the generation of hydroelectric power, water is collected or stored at a higher elevation and led downward through large pipes or tunnels (penstocks) to a lower elevation; the difference in these two elevations is known as the head. At the end of its passage down the pipes, the falling water causes turbines to rotate. The turbines in turn drive generators, which convert the turbines? mechanical energy into electricity. Transformers are then used to convert the alternating voltage suitable for the generators to a higher voltage suitable for long-distance transmission. The structure that houses the turbines and generators, and into which the pipes or penstocks feed, is called the powerhouse.


Fig. 15. Hydroelectric power plant?s structure (Source: Encyclopedia Britanica)
Hydroelectric power plants are usually located in dams that impound rivers, thereby raising the level of the water behind the dam and creating as high a head as is feasible. The potential power that can be derived from a volume of water is directly proportional to the working head, so that a high-head installation requires a smaller volume of water than a low-head installation to produce an equal amount of power. In some dams, the powerhouse is constructed on one flank of the dam, part of the dam being used as a spillway over which excess water is discharged in times of flood. Where the river flows in a narrow steep gorge, the powerhouse may be located within the dam itself.
In most communities the demand for electric power varies considerably at different times of the day. To even the load on the generators, pumped-storage hydroelectric stations are occasionally built. During off-peak periods, some of the extra power available is supplied to the generator operating as a motor, driving the turbine to pump water into an elevated reservoir. Then, during periods of peak demand, the water is allowed to flow down again through the turbine to generate electrical energy. Pumped-storage systems are efficient and provide an economical way to meet peak loads.
Hydroelectric power is the largest and cheapest renewable electricity source in the world, although biomass easily surpasses it when other energy applications are considered. Even so, hydroelectric power releases no direct greenhouse gas emissions and is a significant source of power in many parts of the world.
Hydroelectric power has certain advantages over these other sources. It is continually renewable owing to the recurring nature of the hydrologic cycle. It does not produce thermal pollution. (However, some dams can produce methane from the decomposition of vegetation under water.) Hydroelectric power is a preferred energy source in areas with heavy rainfall and with hilly or mountainous regions that are in reasonably close proximity to the main load centers. Some large hydro sites that are remote from load centers may be sufficiently attractive to justify the long high-voltage transmission lines. Small local hydro sites may also be economical, particularly if they combine storage of water during light loads with electricity production during peaks. It requires relatively high initial investment, but has a long life span with very low operation and maintenance costs. It is a proven, mature, predictable and price competitive technology. Hydropower has the best conversion efficiencies among all known energy sources (about 90?% efficiency, water to wire). Hydropower has an energy payback ratio of 200?300, highest of all types of renewable energies. Hydropower can provide both energy and water management services and also help to support other variable renewable energy sources such as wind and solar, by providing storage and load balancing services.
Many of the negative environmental impacts of hydroelectric power come from the associated dams, which can interrupt the migrations of spawning fish, such as salmon, and permanently submerge or displace ecological and human communities as the reservoirs fill. In addition, hydroelectric dams are vulnerable to water scarcity. This is not to say that hydro power is without adverse environmental impacts, however. Large-scale dams are well known to lead to significant ecological damages, including loss of biodiversity, localized deforestation, soil erosion, and disruption of free-flowing rivers, as well as displacement of large numbers of humans in many cases.
Table 1. Benefits versus adverse impact of hydropower energy

Benefits                                                                               Adverse impacts
O emission of sulfur and nitrogen oxidesInundation of wetlands and terrestrial vegetationFew solid wastesEmissions of greenhouse gases from flooded vegetation at some sitesMinimal impacts from resource extraction, preparation, and transportationConversion of a free-flowing river to a reservoirFlood controlReplacement of riverine aquatic communities with reservoir communitiesWater supply for drinking, irrigation, and industryDisplacement of people and terrestrial wildlifeReservoir-based recreationAlteration of river flow patterns below the damReservoir-based fisheriesLoss of river-based recreation and fisheriesEnhanced tailwater fisheriesDesiccation of streamside vegetation below the damImproved navigation on inland waterways below the damRetention of sediments and nutrients in the reservoirDevelopment of aquatic weeds and eutrophicationAlteration of water quality and temperatureInterference with upstream and downstream passage of aquatic organisms
TIDAL AND WAVE POWER
The moving water from large lakes, seas, and oceans forming waves produced by wind or tides can be used to generate electric power. 
a) Tidal power
Tidal energy is a form of power produced by the natural rise and fall of tides caused by the gravitational interaction between Earth, the sun, and the moon. Tidal currents with sufficient energy for harvesting occur when water passes through a constriction, causing the water to move faster.
Tidal energy is produced by the surge of ocean waters during the rise and fall of tides. Tidal energy is a renewable source of energy. During the 20th century, engineers developed ways to use tidal movement to generate electricity in areas where there is a significant tidal range?the difference in area between high tide and low tide. All methods use special generators to convert tidal energy into electricity. Tidal energy production is still in its infancy. The amount of power produced so far has been small. There are very few commercial-sized tidal power plants operating in the world. The first was located in La Rance, France. The largest tidal plants and only a few sites where tidal energy could be produced at a reasonable price.
Tidal Energy Generators
There are currently three different ways to get tidal energy: tidal streams, barrages, and tidal lagoons.
For most tidal energy generators, turbines are placed in tidal streams. A tidal stream is a fast-flowing body of water created by tides. A turbine is a machine that takes energy from a flow of fluid. That fluid can be air (wind) or liquid (water). Because water is much denser than air, tidal energy is more powerful than wind energy. Unlike wind, tides are predictable and stable. Where tidal generators are used, they produce a steady, reliable stream of electricity.
Placing turbines in tidal streams is complex, because the machines are large and disrupt the tide they are trying to harness. The environmental impact could be severe, depending on the size of the turbine and the site of the tidal stream. Turbines are most effective in shallow water. This produces more energy and allows ships to navigate around the turbines. A tidal generator's turbine blades also turn slowly, which helps marine life avoid getting caught in the system. The world's first tidal power station was constructed in 2007 at Strangford Lough in Northern Ireland. The turbines are placed in a narrow strait between the Strangford Lough inlet and the Irish Sea. The tide can move at 4 meters per second across the strait.
Another type of tidal energy generator uses a large dam called a barrage. With a barrage, water can spill over the top or through turbines in the dam because the dam is low. Barrages can be constructed across tidal rivers, bays, and estuaries. Turbines inside the barrage harness the power of tides the same way a river dam harnesses the power of a river. The barrage gates are open as the tide rises. At high tide, the barrage gates close, creating a pool, or tidal lagoon. The water is then released through the barrage's turbines, creating energy at a rate that can be controlled by engineers.
The environmental impact of a barrage system can be quite significant. The land in the tidal range is completely disrupted. The change in water level in the tidal lagoon might harm plant and animal life. The salinity inside the tidal lagoon lowers, which changes the organisms that are able to live there. As with dams across rivers, fish are blocked into or out of the tidal lagoon. Turbines move quickly in barrages, and marine animals can be caught in the blades. With their food source limited, birds might find different places to migrate. A barrage is a much more expensive tidal energy generator than a single turbine. Although there are no fuel costs, barrages involve more construction and more machines. Unlike single turbines, barrages also require constant supervision to adjust power output. The tidal power plant at the Rance River estuary in Brittany, France, uses a barrage. It was built in 1966 and is still functioning. The plant uses two sources of energy: tidal energy from the English Channel and river current energy from the Rance River. The barrage has led to an increased level of silt in the habitat. Native aquatic plants suffocate in silt, and a flatfish called plaice is now extinct in the area. Other organisms, such as cuttlefish, a relative of squids, now thrive in the Rance estuary. Cuttlefish prefer cloudy, silty ecosystems.
The final type of tidal energy generator involves the construction of tidal lagoons. A tidal lagoon is a body of ocean water that is partly enclosed by a natural or manmade barrier. Tidal lagoons might also be estuaries and have freshwater emptying into them. A tidal energy generator using tidal lagoons would function much like a barrage. Unlike barrages, however, tidal lagoons can be constructed along the natural coastline. A tidal lagoon power plant could also generate continuous power. The turbines work as the lagoon is filling and emptying. The environmental impact of tidal lagoons is minimal. The lagoons can be constructed with natural materials like rock. They would appear as a low breakwater (sea wall) at low tide, and be submerged at high tide. Animals could swim around the structure, and smaller organisms could swim inside it. Large predators like sharks would not be able to penetrate the lagoon, so smaller fish would probably thrive. Birds would likely flock to the area. But the energy output from generators using tidal lagoons is likely to be low. There are no functioning examples yet. 

Fig. 16. Tidal power generating systems (Source: Encyclopedia Britanica)
Globally, tidal power could potentially produce between 150 and 800 terawatt hours of renewable energy per year?at the upper end, that?s more than Canada?s energy production from wind, water, nuclear, fossil fuels, and other sources combined in 2019.
For tidal power generation, location is everything. To produce energy, tidal generators need fast currents or a sizable swing in sea level between high tide and low tide.
b) Wave power
Wave power is also renewable energy representing the capture of energy of wind waves to do useful work ? for example, electricity generation, water desalination, or pumping water.

Fig. 17. Wave power
There are several methods of harnessing wave energy that involve placing electricity generators on the surface of the ocean.
Wave power is typically produced by floating turbine platforms or buoys that rise and fall with the swells. However, wave power can be generated by exploiting the changes in air pressure occurring in wave capture chambers that face the sea or changes in wave pressure on the ocean floor.
The areas of greatest potential for wave energy development are in the latitudes with the highest winds (latitudes 40??60? N and S) on the eastern shores of the world?s oceans (which border the western edges of the continents). For instance, the world?s first operational wave power generator is located off the coast of Agu?adora, Portugal, producing as much as 2.25 megawatts from three huge jointed tubes that float on the surface of the Atlantic Ocean; individual power generators are located at the tubes? joints and activated by wave motion. 

Fig. 18. Floating turbine to produce wave power 
Despite the enormous energy potential of wave power, technical challenges remain. Research funding is low compared with that supporting solar, wind, and other renewable forms of energy, and thus the process of experimentation and refinements with different wave energy collector designs is not as well developed. The development of massive machines for use in the oceans is expensive; salt water in the oceans corrodes steel and other metals, and the physical force of the waves fatigues wave energy collectors, transmission wires, and other infrastructure over time.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY
Geothermal energy is a natural resource and form of energy conversion in which heat energy from within Earth is captured and harnessed for cooking, bathing, space heating, electrical power generation, and other uses.
Heat from Earth?s interior generates surface phenomena such as lava flows, geysers, fumaroles, hot springs, and mud pots. The heat is produced mainly by the radioactive decay of potassium, thorium, and uranium in Earth?s crust and mantle and also by friction generated along the margins of continental plates. The subsequent annual low-grade heat flow to the surface averages between 50 and 70 milliwatts (mW) per square meter worldwide. In contrast, incoming solar radiation striking Earth?s surface provides 342 watts per square meter annually (see solar energy). Geothermal heat energy can be recovered and exploited for human use, and it is available anywhere on Earth?s surface. The estimated energy that can be recovered and utilized on the surface is 4.5 ? 106 exajoules, or about 1.4 ? 106 terawatt-years, which equates to roughly three times the world?s annual consumption of all types of energy.
The amount of usable energy from geothermal sources varies with depth and by extraction method. The increase in temperature of rocks and other materials underground averages 20?30 ?C kilometer depth worldwide in the upper part of the lithosphere, and this rate of increase is much higher in most of Earth?s known geothermal areas. Normally, heat extraction requires a fluid (or steam) to bring the energy to the surface. Locating and developing geothermal resources can be challenging. This is especially true for the high-temperature resources needed for generating electricity. Such resources are typically limited to parts of the world characterized by recent volcanic activity or located along plate boundaries or within crustal hot spots. Even though there is a continuous source of heat within Earth, the extraction rate of the heated fluids and steam can exceed the replenishment rate, and, thus, use of the resource must be managed sustainably.
Uses
Geothermal energy use can be divided into three categories: direct-use applications, geothermal heat pumps (GHPs), and electric power generation.
Direct uses
Probably the most widely used set of applications involves the direct use of heated water from the ground without the need for any specialized equipment. All direct-use applications make use of low-temperature geothermal resources, which range between about 50 and 150 ?C. Such low-temperature geothermal water and steam have been used to warm single buildings, as well as whole districts where numerous buildings are heated from a central supply source. In addition, many swimming pools, balneological (therapeutic) facilities at spas, greenhouses, and aquaculture ponds around the world have been heated with geothermal resources. Other direct uses of geothermal energy include cooking, industrial applications (such as drying fruit, vegetables, and timber), milk pasteurization, and large-scale snow melting. For many of those activities, hot water is often used directly in the heating system, or it may be used in conjunction with a heat exchanger, which transfers heat when there are problematic minerals and gases such as hydrogen sulfide mixed in with the fluid.
Geothermal heat pumps
Geothermal heat pumps (GHPs) take advantage of the relatively stable moderate temperature conditions that occur within the first 300 meters of the surface to heat buildings in the winter and cool them in the summer. In that part of the lithosphere, rocks and groundwater occur at temperatures between 5 and 30 ?C. At shallower depths, where most GHPs are found, such as within 6 meters of Earth?s surface, the temperature of the ground maintains a near-constant temperature of 10 to 16 ?C. Consequently, that heat can be used to help warm buildings during the colder months of the year when the air temperature falls below that of the ground. Similarly, during the warmer months of the year, warm air can be drawn from a building and circulated underground, where it loses much of its heat and is returned.


Fig. 19. Residential heat pump operation for summer cooling and winter heating (Source: Encyclopedia Britannica)
A GHP system is made up of a heat exchanger (a loop of pipes buried in the ground) and a pump. The heat exchanger transfers heat energy between the ground and air at the surface by means of a fluid that circulates through the pipes; the fluid used is often water or a combination of water and antifreeze. During warmer months, heat from warm air is transferred to the heat exchanger and into the fluid. As it moves through the pipes, the heat is dispersed to the rocks, soil, and groundwater. The pump is reversed during the colder months. Heat energy stored in the relatively warm ground raises the temperature of the fluid. The fluid then transfers this energy to the heat pump, which warms the air inside the building.
GHPs have several advantages over more conventional heating and air-conditioning systems. They are very efficient, using 25?50 percent less electricity than comparable conventional heating and cooling systems, and they produce less pollution. The reduction in energy use associated with GHPs can translate into as much as a 44 percent decrease in greenhouse gas emissions compared with air-source heat pumps (which transfer heat between indoor and outdoor air). In addition, when compared with electric resistance heating systems (which convert electricity to heat) coupled with standard air-conditioning systems, GHPs can produce up to 72 percent less greenhouse gas emissions.
Electric power generation
Depending upon the temperature and the fluid (steam) flow, geothermal energy can be used to generate electricity. Geothermal power plants can produce electricity in three ways. Despite their differences in design, all three control the behavior of steam and use it to drive electrical generators. Given that the excess water vapor at the end of each process is condensed and returned to the ground, where it is reheated for later use, geothermal power is considered a form of renewable energy.

Fig. 20. Dry steam geothermal power generation (Source: Encyclopedia Britannica)
Some geothermal power plants simply collect rising steam from the ground. In such ?dry steam? operations, the heated water vapor is funneled directly into a turbine that drives an electrical generator. Other power plants, built around the flash steam and binary cycle designs, use a mixture of steam and heated water (?wet steam?) extracted from the ground to start the electrical generation process.

Fig. 21. Flash steam geothermal power generation (Source: Encyclopedia Britannica)


Fig. 22. Binary-cycle geothermal power generation (Source: Encyclopedia Britannica)
In flash steam power plants, pressurized high-temperature water is drawn from beneath the surface into containers at the surface, called flash tanks, where the sudden decrease in pressure causes the liquid water to ?flash,? or vaporize, into steam. The steam is then used to power the turbine-generator set. In contrast, binary-cycle power plants use steam driven off a secondary working fluid (such as ammonia and hydrocarbons) contained within a closed loop of pipes to power the turbine-generator set. In this process, geothermally heated water is drawn up through a different set of pipes, and much of the energy stored in the heated water is transferred to the working fluid through a heat exchanger. The working fluid then vaporizes. After the vapor from the working fluid passes through the turbine, it is recondensed and piped back to the heat exchanger.
Electrical power usually requires water heated above 175 ?C to be economical. In geothermal plants using the Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC), a special type of binary-cycle technology that utilizes lower-temperature heat sources (such as biomass combustion and industrial waste heat), water temperatures as low as 85?90 ?C may be used.
Exhaustion
Geothermal resources can be exhausted if the rate of heat extraction exceeds the rate of natural heat recharge. Normally, geothermal resources can be used for 20 to 30 years; however, the energy output may decrease with time, making continued development uneconomical. with proper management, geothermal resources can be sustainable for many years, and they can even recover if use is suspended for a period of time.
Economic & environmental issues
Comparing the benefits of geothermal energy with other renewable energy sources, the main advantage of geothermal energy is that its base load is available 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, whereas solar and wind are available only about one-third of the time. In addition, the cost of geothermal energy varies between 5 and 10 cents per kilowatt-hour, which can be competitive with other energy sources, such as coal. The main disadvantage of geothermal energy development is the high initial investment cost in constructing the facilities and infrastructure and the high risk of proving the resources. (Geothermal resources in low-permeability rocks are often found, and exploration activities often drill ?dry? holes?that is, holes that produce steam in amounts too low to be exploited economically.) However, once the resource is proven, the annual cost of fuel (that is, hot water and steam) is low and tends not to escalate in price.

Fig. 23. Geothermal energy uses (Source: Geothermal Education Office, California, SUA)
The environmental effects of geothermal development and power generation include the changes in land use associated with exploration and plant construction, noise and sight pollution, the discharge of water and gases, the production of foul odors, and soil subsidence.
Situation in EU
Geothermal represented 0.5 % of the global renewable electricity market in 2022, generating 0.2 % of electricity in the EU.
In a project called Geothermica, which involves specialists, analysts and financiers from 13 countries, the EU throws in a budget of EUR 30 million for small and large projects using geothermal energy for heating, cooling and electricity generation. Like the wind, the boiling water from the ground would have the potential to contribute to the ?greening? of the air we breathe. As in the case of any other energy source considered, for various social, economic and especially political arguments, as ?savior?, geothermal energy is still dressed in the in the garb of non-polluting righteousness. But, in terms of geothermal water, the EU does not hold such substantial reserves as to witness a new gold rush, as it happened with wind energy.


Fig. 24. Geothermal energy uses function of temperature (Source: www. crowd.thermalproject.com)
The few European states that fall into such a ranking are Iceland or Italy, with almost 1,000 MW, the leader of the EU bloc in this respect. Germany also has a number of intentions to use this type of energy, but for now at small scale, with existing units of less than 40 MW, while Portugal holds 30 MW in geothermal energy. The geothermal energy installed in the EU can supply about 2 million homes.
The use of geothermal energy in Europe is expected to grow rapidly over the next decades, since this energy resource is generally abundant, ubiquitous, versatile, low-carbon, and non-intermittent. The researchers from the above-mentioned project have expanded and adapted the integrated assessment model TIAM-ECN to more adequately reflect geothermal energy potentials and to better represent the various sectors in which geothermal energy could possibly be used. With the updated version of TIAM-ECN, they quantify how large the share of geothermal energy in Europe could grow until 2050, and analyze how this expansion could be stimulated by climate policy and technological progress. They investigate geothermal energy?s two main applications: power and heat production. For the former, an increase to around 100?210?TWh/year in 2050 can be expected, depending on assumptions regarding climate ambition and cost reductions for enhanced geothermal resource systems. For the latter, with applications in residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural sectors, one can anticipate under the same assumptions a rise to about 880?1050?TWh/year in 2050. One can estimate that by the middle of the century geothermal energy plants could contribute approximately 4?7% to European electricity generation. A European geothermal energy investment market (supply plus demand side) possibly worth about 160?210 billion US$/year by mid-century can be foreseen.

Fig. 25. Share of energy from renewable resources in the EU Member States, 2020 target (Source: Eurostat)
BIOMASS & BIOFUELS
Definition: Biofuel is considered any fuel that is derived from biomass?that is, plant or algae material or animal waste. Since such feedstock material can be replenished readily, biofuel is considered to be a source of renewable energy, unlike fossil fuels such as petroleum, coal, and natural gas. Biofuel is commonly advocated as a cost-effective and environmentally benign alternative to petroleum and other fossil fuels, particularly within the context of rising petroleum prices and increased concern over the contributions made by fossil fuels to global warming. Many critics express concerns about the scope of the expansion of certain biofuels because of the economic and environmental costs associated with the refining process and the potential removal of vast areas of arable land from food production.
Other definition is: "Biofuels are biobased products, in solid, liquid, or gaseous forms. They are produced from crops or natural products, such as wood, or agricultural residues, such as molasses and bagasse." 
Highlights: IEA Bioenergy Task 39:
* The EU-27 supply of biofuels in 2020 was around 16 million[L1] Tons of Oil Equivalent (Mtoe), which accounted for 6.3% of the total transport fuel consumption in the EU. About 85% of biofuels supply came from primary production within the EU.
* In 2020, the overall EU production of biofuels was 20 billion liters per year, of which 15 billion liters (about 13 Mtoe) biodiesel and 5 billion liters (about 3 Mtoe) bioethanol. Most biofuels are conventional biofuels produced from vegetable oil as rapeseed, sugar beets and maize, but a growing amount of them is produced from feedstocks such as used cooking oil, reaching more than 4 Mtoe in 2020, representing around 25% of total biofuel consumption. Of this, 1.2 Mtoe are advanced biofuels, produced from lignocellulosic feedstocks, with a limited planned production up to 1.85 Mt/y.
* After the Covid-19 period, the production of liquid biofuels for road transport remained almost constant, but a rapid market uptake is expected in the coming years, in particular for advanced biofuels as biomethane and aviation biofuels.
* New policy mechanisms have been promoted to stimulate the production of biofuels, in particular the Fit-for-55 package revising the RED II and setting more ambitious targets for GHG emissions reduction by 2030. The package also introduced specific targets for non-biological fuels, aviation and maritime biofuels.
* As part of the RE Power EU plan the EC proposed in May 2022 to further increase the share of energy from renewable sources in the gross final consumption of energy to 45% by 2030. RE Power EU is the action for substituting fossil fuels, reducing the dependence on Russian fossil fuels and accelerating Europe?s clean energy transition, to further deployment of renewables.
* RE Power EU has also set a goal to promote renewable gases such as hydrogen and biomethane and in particular to increase biomethane production to 35 bcm (billion cubic meters) by 2030 to replace natural gas imports.
* Advanced biofuels are expected to play an increasing role in transport: a sub-target for advanced biofuels supplied to the transport sector was set at 0.2% in 2022; 1% in 2025 and 3.5% in 2030, integrating the addition of a double counting for these fuels. More ambitions targets are currently revised, given the necessity for a higher greenhouse gas emission reduction from transport sector.
* Several delegated acts are expected to be adopted by the European Commission: delegated act setting the rules to determine the sustainability and eligibility of hydrogen and non-biological fuels (released in February 2023); delegated act setting the methodology for bio-carbon in co-processing crude oil and bio-based feedstock; delegated act updating the RED II for the feedstocks eligible for advanced biofuels production (2023).

Fig. 26. Renewable types of energy used in transport in EU in 2020 (Source: EUROSTAT)

Fig. 27. Biofuel supply chain from primary resources to end user. Adapted with permission from Azad et al. (2015)

Fig. 28. (a) Advancement in biofuels production: first generation to fourth generation. (b) Technologies involved for production of first, second, third, and fourth generations of biofuel. Adapted with permission from Dutta et al. (2014)
First-generation biofuels (also denoted as "conventional biofuels") are made from food crops grown on arable land. The crop's sugar, starch, or oil content is converted into biodiesel or ethanol, using transesterification, or yeast fermentation. To avoid a "food versus fuel" dilemma, second-generation biofuels (also called advanced biofuels or sustainable biofuels) are made from waste products. These are derived from agriculture and forestry activities such as rice straw, rice husk, wood chips, and sawdust. 
The feedstock used to make the fuels either grow on arable land but are byproducts of the main crop, or they are grown on marginal land. Second-generation feedstocks also include straw, bagasse, perennial grasses, jatropha, waste vegetable oil, municipal solid waste and so forth. 

Fig. 29. The production of biofuels from vegetable oils ? Copyright CPL Press

Fig. 30. Biochemical routes to liquid biofuels ? Copyright CPL Press


Fig. 31. Thermochemical routes to liquid biofuels ? Copyright CPL Press
Economic and environmental considerations
In evaluating the economic benefits of biofuels, the energy required to produce them has to be taken into account. For example, the process of growing corn to produce ethanol consumes fossil fuels in farming equipment, in fertilizer manufacturing, in corn transportation, and in ethanol distillation. In this respect, ethanol made from corn represents a relatively small energy gain; the energy gain from sugarcane is greater and that from cellulosic ethanol or algae biodiesel could be even greater.
Biofuels also supply environmental benefits but, depending on how they are manufactured, can also have serious environmental drawbacks. As a renewable energy source, plant-based biofuels in principle make little net contribution to global warming and climate change; the carbon dioxide (a major greenhouse gas) that enters the air during combustion will have been removed from the air earlier as growing plants engage in photosynthesis. Such a material is said to be ?carbon neutral.? In practice, however, the industrial production of agricultural biofuels can result in additional emissions of greenhouse gases that may offset the benefits of using a renewable fuel. These emissions include carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels during the production process and nitrous oxide from soil that has been treated with nitrogen fertilizer. In this regard, cellulosic biomass is considered to be more beneficial.
Land use is also a major factor in evaluating the benefits of biofuels. The use of regular feedstock, such as corn and soybeans, as a primary component of first-generation biofuels sparked the ?food versus fuel? debate. In diverting arable land and feedstock from the human food chain, biofuel production can affect the economics of food price and availability. In addition, energy crops grown for biofuel can compete for the world?s natural habitats. For example, emphasis on ethanol derived from corn is shifting grasslands and brushlands to corn monocultures, and emphasis on biodiesel is bringing down ancient tropical forests to make way for oil palm plantations. Loss of natural habitat can change the hydrology, increase erosion, and generally reduce biodiversity of wildlife areas. The clearing of land can also result in the sudden release of a large amount of carbon dioxide as the plant matter that it contains is burned or allowed to decay.
Some of the disadvantages of biofuels apply mainly to low-diversity biofuel sources?corn, soybeans, sugarcane, oil palms?which are traditional agricultural crops. One alternative involves the use of highly diverse mixtures of species. Converting degraded agricultural land that is out of production to such high-diversity biofuel sources could increase wildlife area, reduce erosion, cleanse waterborne pollutants, store carbon dioxide from the air as carbon compounds in the soil, and ultimately restore fertility to degraded lands. Such biofuels could be burned directly to generate electricity or converted to liquid fuels as technologies develop.
One distinctive promise of biofuels is that, in combination with an emerging technology called carbon capture and storage, the process of producing and using biofuels may be capable of perpetually removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Under this vision, biofuel crops would remove carbon dioxide from the air as they grow, and energy facilities would capture the carbon dioxide given off as biofuels are burned to generate power. Captured carbon dioxide could be sequestered (stored) in long-term repositories such as geologic formations beneath the land, in sediments of the deep ocean, or conceivably as solids such as carbonates. 
EU Regulations: Biofuels and biogas in co-processed fuels
The Commission adopted in June 2023 new rules establishing the share of biofuels and biogas in mixed fuels, co-processed using bio-based and fossil-based raw materials, and that can count towards the Renewable Energy Directive target for renewables in transport. The Delegated Regulation (EU/2023/1640) was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 18 August 2023 and has been subject to public feedback, several consultations and scrutiny from the European Parliament and the Council.
Under the Renewable Energy Directive, EU countries are obliged to ensure that the share of renewable energy in the final consumption of energy in transport is at least 14% by 2030, including a minimum share of 3.5% of advanced biofuels.
They are also required to set out an obligation on fuel suppliers that ensures the achievement of this target.
Sustainability criteria
The revised Renewable Energy Directive (EU/2023/2413) provides an overarching policy for the promotion and use of energy from renewable sources in the EU. It also reinforces the sustainability criteria of bioenergy through different provisions, including the negative direct impact that the production of biofuels may have due to indirect land use change.
While biofuels are important in helping the EU meet its greenhouse gas reduction targets, biofuel production typically takes place on cropland that was previously used for agriculture, to grow food or feed. Since this agricultural production is necessary, biofuel production may lead to the extension of agricultural land into non-crop land, possibly including areas with high carbon stock, such as forests, wetlands and peatlands. This process is known as indirect land use change (ILUC). As it may cause the release of CO2 stored in trees and soil, ILUC poses a risk to the greenhouse gas savings that result from increased production of biofuels.
To address the issue of ILUC, the revised directive introduces a new approach by setting limits on high ILUC-risk biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels with a significant expansion in land with high carbon stock. These limits affect the amount of these fuels that EU countries can count towards their national targets when calculating the overall national share of renewables and the share of renewables in transport. EU countries will still be able to use (and import) fuels covered by these limits, but they will not be able to include these volumes when calculating the extent to which they have fulfilled their renewable targets. These limits impose a freeze equivalent to 2019 levels for the period 2021-2023, which will gradually decrease from the end of 2023 to zero by 2030. The directive also introduces an exemption to these limits for biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels certified as low ILUC-risk.
For the implementation of this approach, as required by the directive, the Commission adopted the Delegated Regulation on indirect land-use change (EU 2019/807), in which it lays down provisions to determine the high ILUC-risk feedstock for which a significant expansion of the production area into land with high carbon stock is observed. It also sets out criteria to certify low ILUC-risk biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels.
Furthermore, specific rules and methodological guidance for certification of low ILUC-risk biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels have been included in the Implementing Regulation on sustainability certification proposed by the Commission in line with Article 30(8) of the revised directive. The Implementing Regulation received on a positive vote by the Committee on the sustainability of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels on 10 March 2022, and was published in the Official Journal on 27 June 2022.
Quality standards for biofuels
Working together with the European Committee for Standardization (CEN), the EU aims to develop and improve the technical quality standards of biofuels and biofuel blends for vehicle engines. The practical work is carried out by CEN Technical Committee 19, consisting of experts from the automotive and fuel industries, biofuels producers, and other stakeholders.
The Commission may decide, by means of an implementing act, that reports submitted by EU countries and by countries outside the EU contain accurate data for the purposes of measuring the greenhouse gas emissions associated with the cultivation of biofuel and bioliquid feedstocks typically produced in those areas.
In general, biofuels emit fewer greenhouse gas emissions when burned in an engine and are generally considered carbon-neutral fuels as the carbon emitted has been captured from the atmosphere by the crops used in production. However, life-cycle assessments of biofuels have shown large emissions associated with the potential land-use change required to produce additional biofuel feedstocks. Estimates about the climate impact from biofuels vary widely based on the methodology and exact situation examined. Therefore, the climate change mitigation potential of biofuel varies considerably: in some scenarios emission levels are comparable to fossil fuels, and in other scenarios the biofuel emissions result in negative emissions. 
Types of biofuels
Some long-exploited biofuels, such as wood, can be used directly as a raw material that is burned to produce heat. The heat, in turn, can be used to run generators in a power plant to produce electricity. A number of existing power facilities burn grass, wood, or other kinds of biomass.
Liquid biofuels are of particular interest because of the vast infrastructure already in place to use them, especially for transportation. 
A. Liquid biofuels
a) The liquid biofuel in greatest production is ethanol (ethyl alcohol), which is made by fermenting starch or sugar. Unlike the ?first-generation? ethanol biofuel produced from food crops, ?second-generation? cellulosic ethanol is derived from low-value biomass that possesses a high cellulose content, including wood chips, crop residues, and municipal waste. Cellulosic ethanol is commonly made from sugarcane bagasse, a waste product from sugar processing, or from various grasses that can be cultivated on low-quality land. Given that the conversion rate is lower than with first-generation biofuels, cellulosic ethanol is dominantly used as a gasoline additive.
Biologically produced alcohols, most commonly ethanol, and less commonly propanol and butanol, are produced by the action of microorganisms and enzymes through the fermentation of sugars or starches (easiest), or cellulose (which is more difficult).The IEA estimates that ethanol production used 20% of sugar supplies and 13% of corn supplies in 2021. 
Ethanol fuel is the most common biofuel worldwide. Alcohol fuels are produced by fermentation of sugars derived from wheat, corn, sugar beets, sugar cane, molasses and any sugar or starch from which alcoholic beverages, can be made (such as potato and fruit waste, etc.). The ethanol production methods used are enzyme digestion (to release sugars from stored starches), fermentation of the sugars, distillation and drying. The distillation process requires significant energy input for heat (sometimes unsustainable natural gas fossil fuel),but pellets, wood chips and also waste heat are more common in Europe. Waste steam fuels ethanol factory ? where waste heat from the factories also is used in the district heating grid. Corn-to-ethanol and other food stocks has led to the development of cellulosic ethanol. 
Other bio alcohols
Methanol is currently produced from natural gas, a non-renewable fossil fuel. In the future it is hoped to be produced from biomass as bio methanol. This is technically feasible, but the production is currently being postponed for concerns that the economic viability is still pending. The methanol economy is an alternative to the hydrogen economy to be contrasted with today's hydrogen production from natural gas. 
Butanol is formed by ABE fermentation (acetone, butanol, ethanol) and experimental modifications of the process show potentially high net energy gains with biobutanol as the only liquid product. Biobutanol is often claimed to provide a direct replacement for gasoline, because it will produce more energy than ethanol and allegedly can be burned "straight" in existing gasoline engines (without modification to the engine or car). Escherichia coli strains have also been successfully engineered to produce butanol by modifying their amino acid metabolism. One drawback to butanol production in E. coli remains the high cost of nutrient rich media, however, recent work has demonstrated E. coli can produce butanol with minimal nutritional supplementation. 
b) Biodiesel
The second most common liquid biofuel is biodiesel, which is made primarily from oily plants (such as the soybean or oil palm) and to a lesser extent from other oily sources (such as waste cooking fat from restaurant deep-frying). Biodiesel, which has found greatest acceptance in Europe, is used in diesel engines and usually blended with petroleum diesel fuel in various percentages. The use of algae and cyanobacteria as a source of ?third-generation? biodiesel holds promise but has been difficult to develop economically. Some algal species contain up to 40 percent lipids by weight, which can be converted into biodiesel or synthetic petroleum. Some estimates state that algae and cyanobacteria could yield between 10 and 100 times more fuel per unit area than second-generation biofuels.
Biodiesel is the most common biofuel in Europe. It is produced from oils or fats using transesterification and is a liquid similar in composition to fossil/mineral diesel. Chemically, it consists mostly of fatty acid methyl (or ethyl) esters (FAMEs). Feedstocks for biodiesel include animal fats, vegetable oils, soy, rapeseed, jatropha, mahua, mustard, flax, sunflower, palm oil, hemp, field pennycress, Pongamia pinnata and algae. Pure biodiesel (B100, also known as "neat" biodiesel) currently reduces emissions with up to 60% compared to diesel. 
Biodiesel can be used in any diesel engine and modified equipment when mixed with mineral diesel. It can also be used in its pure form (B100) in diesel engines, but some maintenance and performance problems may then occur during wintertime utilization, since the fuel becomes somewhat more viscous at lower temperatures, depending on the feedstock used. 
In many European countries, a 5% biodiesel blend is widely used and is available at thousands of gas stations. Biodiesel is also an oxygenated fuel, meaning it contains a reduced amount of carbon and higher hydrogen and oxygen content than fossil diesel. This improves the combustion of biodiesel and reduces the particulate emissions from unburnt carbon. However, using pure biodiesel may increase NOx-emissions.
Biodiesel is also safe to handle and transport because it is non-toxic and biodegradable, and has a high flash point of about 148?C, compared to petroleum diesel fuel, which has a flash point of 52?C. 
In France, biodiesel is incorporated at a rate of 8% in the fuel used by all French diesel vehicles. Avril Group produces under the brand Diester, a fifth of 11 million tons of biodiesel consumed annually by the European Union. It is the leading European producer of biodiesel. 
Green diesel
Green diesel is produced through hydrocracking biological oil feedstocks, such as vegetable oils and animal fats. Hydrocracking is a refinery method that uses elevated temperatures and pressure in the presence of a catalyst to break down larger molecules, such as those found in vegetable oils, into shorter hydrocarbon chains used in diesel engines. It may also be called renewable diesel, hydrotreated vegetable oil (HVO fuel) or hydrogen-derived renewable diesel. Unlike biodiesel, green diesel has exactly the same chemical properties as petroleum-based diesel. It does not require new engines, pipelines or infrastructure to distribute and use, but has not been produced at a cost that is competitive with petroleum. 
Straight vegetable oil
Straight unmodified edible vegetable oil is generally not used as fuel, but lower-quality oil has been used for this purpose. Used vegetable oil is increasingly being processed into biodiesel, or (more rarely) cleaned of water and particulates and then used as a fuel. The IEA estimates that biodiesel production used 17% of global vegetable oil supplies in 2021. 
An aviation biofuel (also known as bio-jet fuel or bio-aviation fuel (BAF)) is a biofuel used to power aircraft and is said to be a sustainable aviation fuel (SAF). The International Air Transport Association (IATA) considers it a key element to reducing the carbon footprint within the environmental impact of aviation. Aviation biofuel could help decarbonize medium- and long-haul air travel generating most emissions, and could extend the life of older aircraft types by lowering their carbon footprint. The jargon synthetic paraffinic kerosene (SPK) refers to any non-petroleum-based fuel designed to replace kerosene jet fuel, which are often, but not always, made from biomass. 
Aviation biofuel can be produced from plant or animal sources such as Jatropha, algae, tallows, waste oils, palm oil, Babassu, and Camelina (bio-SPK); from solid biomass using pyrolysis processed with a Fischer?Tropsch process (FT-SPK); with an alcohol-to-jet (ATJ) process from waste fermentation; or from synthetic biology through a solar reactor. Small piston engines can be modified to burn ethanol. 
Sustainable biofuels do not compete with food crops, prime agricultural land, natural forest or fresh water. Sustainable aviation fuel is certified as being sustainable by a third-party organization.
B. Gaseous biofuels
Biogas and biomethane
Other biofuels include methane gas and biogas?which can be derived from the fermentation of biomass in the absence of oxygen?and methanol, butanol, and dimethyl ether?which are in development.
Biogas is a mixture composed primarily of methane and carbon dioxide produced by the process of anaerobic digestion of organic material by micro-organisms. Other trace components of this mixture include water vapor, hydrogen sulfide, siloxanes, hydrocarbons, ammonia, oxygen, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen. It can be produced either from biodegradable waste materials or by the use of energy crops fed into anaerobic digesters to supplement gas yields. The solid byproduct, digestate, can be used as a biofuel or a fertilizer. When CO2 and other impurities are removed from biogas, it is called biomethane. 
Biogas can be recovered from mechanical biological treatment waste processing systems. Landfill gas, a less clean form of biogas, is produced in landfills through naturally occurring anaerobic digestion. If it escapes into the atmosphere, it acts as a greenhouse gas. 
Farmers can produce biogas from manure from their cattle by using anaerobic digesters. 
Syngas
Syngas, a mixture of carbon monoxide, hydrogen and various hydrocarbons, is produced by partial combustion of biomass, that is, combustion with an amount of oxygen that is not sufficient to convert the biomass completely to carbon dioxide and water. Before partial combustion, the biomass is dried, and sometimes pyrolyzed. The resulting gas mixture, syngas, is more efficient than direct combustion of the original biofuel; more of the energy contained in the fuel is extracted. 
Syngas may be burned directly in internal combustion engines, turbines or high-temperature fuel cells. The wood gas generator, a wood-fueled gasification reactor, can be connected to an internal combustion engine. 
Syngas can be used to produce methanol, dimethyl ether and hydrogen, or converted via the Fischer?Tropsch process to produce a diesel substitute, or a mixture of alcohols that can be blended into gasoline. Gasification normally relies on temperatures greater than 700?C. 
Lower-temperature gasification is desirable when co-producing biochar, but results in syngas polluted with tar. 

I. ENERGY FROM SOLID WASTE BIOTRANSFORMATION (presented in the MODULE 3: INDUSTRIAL STRATEGY FOR CIRCULAR ECONOMY-BIOECONOMY)
II. GREEN HYDROGEN
First of all, it is useful to explain what it is the production of GREEN HYDROGEN. Green hydrogen (GH2 or GH2) is hydrogen produced by the electrolysis of water, using electricity generated from renewable sources. Hydrogen can be utilized as a safe and reliable fuel, but it must be produced from a primary source of energy. It is considered desirable because, when you burn it, hydrogen produces water as a byproduct. No greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions or air pollutants are associated with the use of hydrogen. Hydrogen has the highest energy density amongst today?s most commonly used fuels, which include natural gas, gasoline, and diesel. Hydrogen is much lighter than gasoline vapor and air, so it dissipates quickly when it is released. This enables quick dispersion in the event of a leak. Since at room temperature hydrogen has a very low density, hydrogen energy is typically measured by weight in kilograms instead of by volume. Despite being a colorless gas, hydrogen has been assigned color codes that are used by the energy industry to indicate the energy sources, production processes, and primary feedstocks used to produce hydrogen.
The following scheme can introduce the differences between GREY, BLUE and GREEN hydrogen:

Fig. 32. Grey versus Blue versus Green hydrogen
The scenario of net zero emissions in 2050 imposes a lot of energetic transformations and important orientation towards green hydrogen, as it is represented in the following 2 schemes:

(a)

(b)
Fig 33. (a) and (b) Conditions for EU to produce green hydrogen (Source: BloombergNEF)
https://hydrogen.revolve.media/2022/features/hydrogen-outlook/

Fig. 34. Breakdown of hydrogen production technologies using various sources: today and prediction for the year 2050 (International Energy Agency Technical Report 2013)
As one can see at the worldwide level the predictions regarding hydrogen production technologies in 2050 is not optimistic: H2 by electrolysis or from biomass can represent not more than 30 %, and the level of green hydrogen from water hydrolysis is not evaluated.
Hydrogen, being a clean energy carrier, concurrently decarbonizes the commercial, residential, industrial, and transportation sectors. Although, at present hydrogen is being considered as the main alternative to and replacement for fossil fuels, it is not a naturally occurring substance. Instead, it is found in chemical substances such as hydrocarbons and water that must undergo chemical transformation to produce hydrogen gas. The most widely utilized technique for largescale hydrogen generation is the steam reforming of natural gas. Producing hydrogen by steam reforming natural gas involves the utilization of fossil fuels at the production stage, where greenhouse gases are emitted.
In order to speed up the transition to Net Zero, hydrogen must be obtained from a process like water electrolysis (green hydrogen), which does not involve using fossil fuels. In spite of the fact that many industries in EU and all over the world have already implemented hydrogen fuel systems in its infancy, the production, storage, transportation, and utilization of hydrogen present issues that need to be addressed.
Hydrogen economy, synonymous with sustainable energy, refers to the situation where the whole energy system of a country is solely based on hydrogen. It can also be defined as an economy in which hydrogen is the primary energy carrier along with electricity. The realization and development of hydrogen-based economies have been difficult and challenging tasks due to the substantial investments needed. Hydrogen has always had the potential to be significant, but the challenges of establishing hydrogen economies all over the world have hindered progress. This is mainly because the production, storage, transportation, distribution, and utilization sectors in the hydrogen economy all have challenges that need to be addressed while maintaining strategic policy support.
Hydrogen preparation & water electrolysis / splitting
Water splitting seems to be the most viable process for large scale hydrogen production from non-fossil natural resources at the moment. For the water splitting process, solar radiation is first converted to electricity in a photovoltaic cell, after which the water electrolysis takes place in a different cell. Water electrolysis is achieved using an electrolyzer device. The most commonly used electrolyzer device is the alkaline electrolyzer. This type of electrolyzer has a relatively low capital cost compared to the other types of electrolyzers.
An alkaline electrolyzer uses a cell with an anode, cathode, and an electrolyte based on a solution of caustic salts. Energy is needed to break water molecules into oxygen and hydrogen, but this energy is eventually recovered during the oxidation process to produce water. The energy needed to split the water to release hydrogen must be obtained from a non-fossil source such as hole-electron pair excitement in a robust semiconductor by solar radiation. A sturdy semiconductor material that can satisfy and withstand nature?s competing requirements is to be used.
Existing challenges for water electrolysis presently include low conversion efficiency, high electric power costs, and high production costs. The ways of alleviating water electrolysis costs are by reducing the cost of electricity, reducing the cost of the electrolyte, or removing the membrane (separator) to reduce ohmic losses. For the reduction of the cost of electricity, intermittent electricity generated from renewable sources such as hydropower and wind can be used. Nuclear energy offers more cost-effective electrolysis and thermolysis compared to other energy sources.
Hydrogen can also be produced from biomass, which is a more environmentally friendly method than generating hydrogen from fossil fuels. Large-scale hydrogen generation from biomass involves the steam reforming of bio-oils, steam gasification, pyrolysis, gasification, and the decomposition of sugars using enzymes. There are numerous benefits to microbial hydrogen production. But since this technology is still in the lab, it cannot be quickly and widely used. The main concerns for the mass production of hydrogen from biomass are determining if the site being used for producing hydrogen from biomass competes with the feedstock while also addressing the political aspects of this decision.
Hydrogen storage
Once hydrogen is produced, it must be stored. Depending on its intended use, hydrogen can be stored in the liquid state (e.g., cryogenic liquid dewars), the solid state (e.g., metal hydrides), or the gaseous state (e.g., compressed hydrogen gas being stored in high-pressure gas tanks).
Using high pressure storage tanks for storing compressed hydrogen is the conventional approach for the storage of hydrogen gas. Geological storage such as depleted oil and gas reservoirs, salt caverns, and aquifers are currently being considered as the most the most cost-effective and viable options for storing large amounts of gaseous hydrogen.
The approach for storing liquid hydrogen can be done using the liquefaction technique. The method of hydrogen liquefaction comprises of compression, expansion, and cooling to convert hydrogen gas to liquid hydrogen. A dewar-type vessel will then be utilized to keep liquid hydrogen at a final temperature of -253.15 0C. Because a significant portion of the hydrogen's energy content may be lost during liquefaction, storing hydrogen in liquid form entails high energy expenses.
Storing hydrogen in the solid form can be done by chemically bonding it to alloys in the form of metal hydrides. Metallic alloys that absorb hydrogen are referred to as metal hydrides. Alloys can be used as a storage mechanism due to their ability to absorb and release hydrogen. These metal hydrides can be categorized into three main groups: Ti-based alloys, Mg-based alloys, and LaNi5-based alloys. To resist the charge-discharge cycles, these metal hydride alloys must be thermally and structurally stable. Implementing metal hydride storage systems presents two key challenges: a delay between initial heating and the release of the hydrogen gas, and insufficient heat to generate hydrogen from the hydride.
Choosing the state or form for storing hydrogen strongly depends on the end-use energy conversion applications, with each storage option having its own pros and cons. Hydrogen being stored in the solid state on the other hand, is considered more efficient and safer than liquefaction and compression due to lower self-discharge, leak proof status, and higher charging efficiency cons.
Transportation and distribution of hydrogen
High-strength steel pipelines linking the storage and production points to the end-use points make up the infrastructure for transporting and distributing hydrogen. Pipeline materials constantly in contact with hydrogen easily get embrittled by hydrogen. This mechanism is referred to as hydrogen embrittlement and can damage a wide range of materials, even the high-strength steel pipelines currently being used for transporting and distributing hydrogen. In hydrogen embrittlement, lone hydrogen atoms first diffuse through the metal. Small quantities of hydrogen diffuse into the metal at higher temperatures, while diffusion is aided by a concentration gradient at lower temperatures. While recombining in minuscule voids of the metal to form hydrogen molecules, hydrogen atoms create pressure in the cavity they are trapped in. The pressure will build-up and eventually cause the metal to crack open. By adhering to the recommended maintenance procedures and safety measures, unwanted losses and damages can be easily avoided. Other transportation and distribution system components, including pressure reduction stations, pipe seals, and end-use components, must also be evaluated for suitability. 
According to a study conducted by the EU, natural gas can be blended with about 30% hydrogen without putting the general public?s safety in jeopardy.
Future hydrogen transportation and distribution systems may resemble the natural gas pipelines that are currently in use, but with new modifications like better duct materials to prevent hydrogen leakage, alternative working pressures, and higher flow rates to overcome gaseous hydrogen's lower energy content. It is envisaged in the hydrogen economy that from the production plants and storage units, liquid hydrogen will be transported and distributed to consumers by means of supertankers, while gaseous hydrogen will be transported and distributed through underground pipelines. 
Hydrogen use
In addition to hydrogen?s usage in the chemical and oil and gas sectors, it can also be utilized in transportation applications such as Internal Combustion Engines (ICEs) and fuel cells. Hydrogen fuel cells have enormous potential in the transportation sector to improve the energy efficiency, significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and ultimately eradicate the utilization of fossil fuels. Not only can fuel cells be used in trucks, buses, and cars, but they can also be used to power electric ships and replace diesel electric generators in locomotives. Hydrogen fuel cells are seen as the most promising power source for next generation automobiles in the hydrogen economy and the only technology that has a chance of rivalling internal combustion engines. (ICEs). Hydrogen's primary selling point as a fuel is its intrinsic suitability for usage in fuel cells. A fuel cell vehicle powered by pure hydrogen is considered an emission-free vehicle because the only byproduct is water. While maintaining comparable characteristics in terms of peak speed, range, and acceleration, fuel cell vehicles are considered way more efficient than conventional vehicles.
Advancements in the hydrogen-powered vehicle technology are market-driven and must compete with the conventional vehicles presently. The lack of refueling infrastructure, the low cost of gasoline, and the rise in vehicle costs are all impeding the advancement of hydrogen fuel cell vehicles. Another major concern is how to provide hydrogen to fuel cells. The options available are to either use the vehicle?s fuel processor to produce hydrogen or store hydrogen on board of the vehicles.
Hydrogen has a wide range of benefits. Hydrogen plays a significant role in decarbonizing global energy sectors by presenting carbon-free fuel flexibility and also providing energy storage to the grid. Hydrogen?s versatility as a clean fuel, ability to power system services and provide heat can be exploited to reduce the carbon intensity of multiple economic sectors. The deployment of hydrogen technologies could neutralize up to about one-fourth of global greenhouse gas emissions produced by industries and fossil fuels by the year 2030. Thousands of green jobs will also be generated as global hydrogen economies develop. The skills applied in the fossil fuel industries today are applicable to the green hydrogen industries. Also, the utilization of hydrogen as an alternative option to diesel and gasoline for transport will reduce price shocks that usually occur in the global fossil fuel supply chain. This is mainly because hydrogen can be produced from various renewable sources, so ultimately, its price will stabilize in the long run. 
For the many benefits hydrogen provides, there are still a few cons and challenges that need to be addressed. Despite hydrogen being the most abundant element on earth, it does not exist on its own and needs to be extracted from either water using the water electrolysis technique or fossil fuels. Both of which demand a substantial amount of energy to be achieved. Given how highly flammable hydrogen is as a fuel, there are legitimate safety concerns about its widespread utilization.
Based on the goal of hydrogen economies, the benefits of hydrogen far outweigh the cons. Hydrogen has a great potential to become the ideal solution for the future of our energy requirements, but this will require massive investments and political decisions. 
Hydrogen offers a major potential to solve the energy landscape?s biggest challenge, which is to decarbonize heat. Ongoing research shows that hydrogen is the leading choice for decarbonizing heat without jeopardizing the safety of the general public.
An open-minded vision for the time being, but optimistic and really interesting for the future is to link preparation of Hydrogen by circular economy / bioeconomy technologies with use of this gas as renewable fuel in a decarbonated system creating the already defined Hydrogen economy, as it is represented in the following presentation. Linking water industries (WI) and circular economy (CRE) perspectives are crucial to green hydrogen production (HP).
Thus, it is essential to manage the water, and wastewater resources following reduce, reuse, recycle, reclaim, recover, and restore (6Rs) strategies of CRE. Establishing a CRE-based, self-energy-generating WI can be a plausible solution for the future energy crisis and sustainable resources management.

Fig. 35. Connection between circular economy to produce TREATED WATER to be used further on to generate GREENHYDROGEN (M. M. Kabir et al, Desalinization, 554, 116448, 1-48, 2023)


Fig. 36. A flow diagram of linear and circular economy. (M. M. Kabir et al, Desalinization, 554, 116448, 1-48, 2023)
There are still numerous obstacles and limitations that currently limit the potential of hydrogen as a fuel source to serve as a significant alternative to FFs now, such as large-scale hydrogen production cost, infrastructure investments, bulk storage, transport, and distribution, safety considerations, the absence of an existing value chain, and the requirement for international standards and so on.
Considering the environmental pollution, Global warming issues, and future energy security, a two-fold revolutionary energy transition is immediately necessary. The earliest movement can be the energy revolution: the steady and intensive transition from FF-based primary energy to sustainable and renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, geothermal, biomass and water. The subsequent phase would be the development of a sustainable hydrogen economy based on the extensive usage of hydrogen as a green secondary energy carrier.
1. The CRE does not concentrate on WI at a large-scale, also the applications, scopes, opportunities, limitations, and challenges of CRE implementation in water industries are still unexplored. Thus, identification and the potential implications of CRE in WI are essential for sustainable water resources management and resource recovery.
2. Compared with the overall production method, the most environmentally friendly HP offers photonic energy, and the highest efficiency offers thermal energy.
3. Considering feed sources PEM (proton exchange membrane electrolyze) is the most suitable technology for HP in pure water, whereas MECs (microbial electrolysis cells) are the most appropriate technology for HP in wastewater. If we consider seawater as a feed source ED (electrodialysis) and RED (reverse electrodialysis) are the most competitive technologies for simultaneous desalination and HP. Although, all these HP technologies are in their R& D stage.
4. An analysis by the IEA found that the HP costs for green hydrogen ($2.5?5/kg), blue hydrogen ($1.50?3.50/kg), and grey hydrogen are all roughly $1.50/kg (Yue et al., 2021). The cost of HP
technologies like EL (electrolysis), RED, and PECM (photo-electrochemical method) must be reduced to make hydrogen a viable fuel source for everyone.
5. Case studies analysis in HP technologies and WI suggested European countries were the dominant hydrogen producers having 62.69 % of active projects. Germany had the highest number of active hydrogen production case studies recorded to be 50. 
6. The major challenge for developing a hydrogen economy is scaling up HP, and the transition from carbon-intensive to low carbon HP. Costs for green HP are still too high to be competitive with other energy sources economically. The hydrogen price per kg should be approximately $1.5 for HP to be profitable. The need for ultrapure water poses one of the biggest obstacles since it takes 9 L of water to produce 1 kg of hydrogen gas, which could trigger a water shortage in the future Hydrogen Economy (HE).
The future perspectives and research directions of green hydrogen production in WI for CRE framework are recommended as follows:
? Establishment of a CRE-based, selfhydrogen energy-generating WI can be a plausible solution for the future energy crisis and sustainable resources management. Since, one of the significant requirements of water electrolysis is the need for highly pure water feeds. Before further proceeding to develop a HE by 2030, the feasibility study of pure water requirement is highly recommended.
? It was estimated that 21 billion m3 of pure fresh water would be required to meet the ambitious demand for HE by 2030.
Accessible freshwater makes up just <1 % of the planet?s water. It is best to avoid burdening freshwater usage, especially in areas where drinking water is difficult to attain. Almost all the remaining 99 %, or about 1.4 billion km3, is seawater, which can be purified through desalination processes before being used as an electrolysis feedstock by electrodialysis or reverse osmosis techniques.
? Special consideration should be focused on wastewater to hydrogen production because it was estimated that 359 billion m3 of wastewater is produced each year and 785 million people lack access to clean drinking water. Simultaneous WW treatment, resource recovery (Nitrogen, potassium and phosphorus) and hydrogen production could be a feasible option to clean green hydrogen production for a better HE without burdening the fresh water.
? Green hydrogen cost could be one of the most significant obstacles to proceed with the HE, hence measures should be taken to maintain the hydrogen cost within 1?1.5 $/kg hydrogen to compete with the alternative FFs-based energy.
? Research on developing cost-effective catalysts and inexpensive membrane materials for PEM electrolysis for HP are needed from PW (pure water), whereas MECs needs simple cell design, high membranes stability and minimal operational costs.
? Hydrogen storage and safety issues also be needed to consider.
Research and development should be focused on development of low-cost hydrogen storage materials. In order to minimize possible hazards and risks of hydrogen, health and environmental safety guidelines should be followed strictly.
? International standards and regulations on the growth of worldwide H2 market and development of a proper hydrogen supply chain system would be necessary for the future HE.




Fig. 37. Linking Circular economy system (CRE) with global energy system (GES) (Source: Modified with copyright permission of International Energy Association (IEA), 2021)


[L1]


