
MODULE IV. GREEN / SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE

EU target: 
* ensure food security in the face of geopolitical uncertainties, climate change and biodiversity loss
* reduce the environmental and climate footprint of the EU food system
* strengthen the EU food system?s resilience
* lead a global transition towards competitive sustainability from farm to fork
Intensive conventional agriculture contributes to climate change, water pollution, loss of biodiversity, or natural-resource depletion, as well as being directly affected by it. Even though such concerns are broadly acknowledged, we continue to uphold excessive and unsustainable production or consumption habits that are responsible for exceeding our planet?s boundaries or reaching irreversible tipping points. Due to our population growth rate, we must simultaneously focus on feeding humanity while not depleting natural resources.
This is why the future is the application of Green / Sustainable agriculture, which can be defined as desired type of agricultural activity to supply society's food and textile needs in the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. So, it is to develop a healthy food system for people and planet and it is a type of agriculture that is the opposite of intensive agriculture.
Sustainable agriculture aims to reduce CO2 emissions, avoid soil degradation from pesticides and fertilizers, conserve water, and increase biodiversity. However, achieving this goal requires considering various social and economic factors. One crucial aspect is the integration of innovative technologies that could either help to transition to sustainable agriculture or worsen the environmental impact of industrial agriculture. In essence, sustainable agriculture aims to produce food without harming the environment while ensuring fair conditions for farmers and workers.
Sustainable agriculture aims to tackle the two main challenges facing humanity resulting from conventional farming practices: environmental degradation and climate change. The link between healthy people, healthy societies and a healthy planet puts sustainable food systems at the heart of the European Green Deal, the EU?s sustainable and inclusive growth strategy. It is designed to boost the economy, improve people's health and quality of life, and care for nature.
I. CAP-COMMON AGRICULTURE POLICY
EU?s CAP is central to the EU Green Deal & its Farm to Fork and Biodiversity strategies.
The European agriculture and food system, supported by the Common Agricultural Policy, is already a global standard in terms of safety, security of supply, nutrition and quality. Now, it must also become the global standard for sustainability. A shift to a sustainable food system, while ensuring food affordability and availability, brings environmental, health and social benefits, as well as offering fairer economic gains.
That is why in July 2023 the Commission adopted a package of measures for a sustainable use of key natural resources, which will also strengthen the resilience of European food systems and farming. The package includes a new soil law, which will help us have healthy soils in the EU by 2050, a regulation on plants produced by genome techniques, and measures to reduce food and textile waste. Its adoption completes the previous proposals under the ?natural resources' pillar of the European Green Deal.
Today the CAP supports a modern, market-oriented farming sector providing safe, affordable, high-quality food, produced sustainably and respecting consumer standards (environmental, animal welfare, food safety, etc.), as well as supporting investment in the broader rural economy. The CAP is a common policy for all EU countries, managed and funded at European level from the EU?s budget:
* income support through direct payments that help protect income stability for farmers who comply with environmental and social requirements;?
* market ?measures? to help the agri-food sector deal with difficult market situations; 
* rural development ?interventions? addressing specific needs and challenges facing rural Europe.?

Fig. 1. EEA, 2019, ?Nature?s nutrient cycle? (https://www.eea.europa.eu/signals/signals-2019-content-list/infographics/agriculture/view)
The common agricultural policy (CAP) is built around three main goals to achieve a sustainable system of agriculture in the EU: economic sustainability, environmental sustainability, and. the social sustainability of farms.
Main objectives:
1. Ensuring viable farm income
Support viable farm income and the resilience of the agricultural sector across the EU in order to enhance long-term food security and agricultural diversity as well as to ensure the economic sustainability of agricultural production.

Fig 2. CAP specific objectives
2. Increasing competitiveness: the role of productivity
Enhance market orientation and increase farm competitiveness both in the short and long term, including greater focus on research, technology and digitalization.
3. Farmer position in value chains
Providing measures that aim to strengthen farmers? position in a continuously evolving value chain, increase market transparency, and ensure effective mechanisms against unfair trading practices.
4. Agriculture and climate mitigation
Contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation, including by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and enhancing carbon sequestration as well as promoting sustainable energy.
5. Efficient soil management
Foster sustainable development and efficient management of natural resources such as water, soil and air, including by reducing chemical dependency.
6. Biodiversity and farmed landscapes
Contribute to halting and reversing biodiversity loss, enhance ecosystem services and preserve habitats and landscapes.
7. Structural change and generational renewal
Attract and sustain young farmers and new farmers and facilitate sustainable business development in rural areas.
8. Jobs and growth in rural areas
Promote employment, growth, gender equality, including the participation of women in farming, social inclusion and local development in rural areas, as well as the circular bio-economy and sustainable forestry.
9. Health, Food & Antimicrobial Resistance
Improve the response of EU agriculture to societal demands relating to food and health, including high-quality, safe and nutritious food produced in a sustainable way, to reduce food waste, as well as to improve animal welfare and combat antimicrobial resistance.
10. Driving simplification
Modernize agriculture and rural areas by fostering and sharing knowledge, innovation and digitalization and by encouraging their uptake by farmers through improved access to research, innovation, knowledge exchange and training.
Improvements to existing requirements will also further increase sustainability, for example:
a) To improve long-term soil health, in principle farmers will be required to carry out beneficial crop rotations. Crop ?diversification? (the current obligation) will be permitted as an alternative although it does not have the same benefit for soil health as crop rotation. With exemptions taken into account, the obligation of crop rotation or diversification will apply to an estimated 86% of the EU?s arable land.
b) Farmers will also increase their contribution to biodiversity by in principle devoting at least 4% of their arable land to non-productive features and areas, including fallow land. The obligatory minimum for such non-productive features will be 3% where farmers ?top up? that total to 7% through an eco-scheme, or where farmers devote significant additional land to catch crops or nitrogen-fixing crops (cultivated without plant protection products or fertilizers in each case).
Compatibility with the Green Deal
As a first step, the nine common objectives cover economic, social and environmental dimensions. In line with the Green Deal?s ambitions, they aim to increase the contribution of EU agriculture to climate change action, improve the management of natural resources, ensure a fair economic return for farmers, and reinforce the protection of biodiversity, among others.
The new way of working proposed for the future CAP is one of the key elements that makes the proposals compatible with the Green Deal. Based on a thorough assessment of the local conditions and needs, Member States will produce a national CAP strategic plan that will explain how they will use CAP tools to achieve the nine objectives, in consultation with stakeholders and competent national authorities. In addition, to ensure that these plans are coherent and consistent with the required environmental ambition, the Commission will approve each CAP strategic plans ahead of their implementation. Finally, quantified targets will allow the Commission to monitor the progress made by Member States when implementing the CAP.
In addition, the CAP proposal includes tools that will further promote sustainable farming practices throughout the EU, crucial to achieve the Green Deal?s ambitions.
Among those, the future CAP includes conditionality, which links area and animal-based CAP payments to a range of obligations. In addition, it also introduces the new ?eco-schemes? that aim to reward farmers for going further in the implementation of sustainable agricultural practices. These practices could include the implementation of environmentally friendly production systems such as agroecology, agroforestry and organic farming. The rural development framework also includes environmental and climate management commitments, which aim to compensate farmers and other beneficiaries for voluntarily committing themselves to implement sustainable practices.
Furthermore, other tools under rural development can support the transition. For example, funds can be used to invest in green infrastructure, in knowledge transfer and innovation or in developing access to fast broadband in rural areas. On top of this, the CAP proposals include that a minimum of 30% of rural development funds should go towards CAP interventions that address specific environmental and climate-related objectives.
Furthermore, the CAP proposals also include objectives on rebalancing power in the food supply chain as well as contributing to new societal demands related to food and health, including safe, nutritious and sustainable food, food waste, and animal welfare. In practical terms, this means that Member States are required to review their actions in these areas and propose how to use different CAP tools to address challenges identified. For instance, the Commission will continue to support cooperation between producers through producer organizations. These types of organizations allow producers to strengthen their position in the supply chain, increase their resilience and act collectively to enhance sustainability of the supply chain. These objectives are also reflected in the Green Deal?s ambitions. They will be essential to enable the transition while leaving no one behind.
Adapting and applying research on the ground: The European Innovation Partnership for Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability (EIP-AGRI) will continue to help translate research results into innovations ?on the ground? - with support from CAP tools financing related investments, co-operation and knowledge exchange and innovation support services.
The common agricultural policy (CAP) 2023-27 entered into force on 1 January 2023. This marked the beginning of the implementation of the 28 approved CAP Strategic Plans in 27 EU countries (EU members have one Strategic Plan each, except Belgium, which has one for Flanders and one for Wallonia).
A total of ?386.6 billion is available for the CAP from the EU budget (2021-2027). This is divided between two funds (often referred to as the ?two pillars? of the CAP). These are:?
* the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF), known as Pillar 1, which provides ?291.1 billion of direct financial support to farmers;??
* the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD), known as Pillar 2, which provides ?95.5 billion (including ?8.1 billion from the Next Generation EU recovery instrument) for socio-economic and environmental interventions.?
In November 2023, the European Commission published an assessment of CAP Strategic Plans (CSP) delivery on CAP objectives. The report relies on the information contained in the CAP national plans as well as on qualitative appraisals of the potential effects of the choices made by EU countries. This preliminary assessment summarizes the combined contributions of the interventions planned by EU countries to address the CAP specific objectives and the six EU-wide Green Deal targets on:
* Fairer income for farmers and keeping rural areas vibrant;
* Environment and climate action;
* Social sustainability and societal expectations such as animal welfare.


Fig. 3. EU budget distribution for CAP for the period 2023-2027
Directions of action:
a. A stronger position for farmers in the marketplace:
* Improved rules on competition: Limited exemptions from competition law will be expanded in a well-targeted manner - allowing farmers to work together to strengthen their position in the food supply chain. This includes derogations for agreements setting higher sustainability standards as well as possibilities for supply regulation for foodstuffs with protected geographical names.
b. Social conditionality: linking support to respect of rights of farm workers. The new CAP steps up the support for generational renewal and participation of women in the farming sector
c. Improving the knowledge base: By allowing transfers of CAP funds to the EU Erasmus program, the CAP offers Member States an opportunity to enhance the transnational learning-related mobility of young farmers and of women from rural areas.
d. Comprehensive and strategic approach: Each Member State will have to set out in its CAP Plan (CSP) its strategy for stimulating innovation and modernization. This strategy should refer, among other things, to:
-the overall organization of the Member State?s Agricultural Knowledge and Innovation System (AKIS);
-the way in which CAP networks, advisory services and research will cooperate in the context of AKIS;
-a strategic approach towards the digitalization of farming and rural areas. EUR 9 billion for research and innovation in the area of Food, Bioeconomy, Natural Resources, Agriculture and Environment are part of the Horizon Europe program 2021-2027. 
e. At the same time, the higher level of resources allocated to the complementary redistributive income support for sustainability (CRISS) reinforces income support that goes directly to smaller and medium-sized farms.
f. There is a pattern across the EU to supplement income support for farming in areas with natural and other constraints (ANC). By compensating higher costs of producing food and feed in areas affected by poor climate, soil or other conditions such as mountains or land in dry or cold territories, this support helps maintain agricultural activity in such areas and positively influences socio-economic factors.
g. Overall, 35% of the EU?s farmland should benefit from land-based voluntary actions for both carbon sequestration and reduction of N2O emissions.
h. CSPs? support for extensive livestock systems helps to maintain not only carbon stocks but also traditional landscapes, while improving feed autonomy and economic activities on marginal land. Many CSPs recognize explicitly the need to reduce livestock-related emissions (notably methane from ruminants). In particular, CSPs include support for investments in: improving manure storage and management; equipment for low-emission slurry spreading; and anaerobic digesters. This will be supplemented by support for genetic improvements.
i. The potential to increase sustainable energy production through the CSPs comes mainly from support for the use of agro-photovoltaics and investment in biomethane production.
j. Approaches to adapt to the decrease of available water and ensure long-term resilience (through nature-based solutions, water retention in the landscape, less water-intensive crops, water reuse) will have to be reinforced and better integrated with long-term strategic planning. By 2027, an estimated 10% of the EU?s agricultural area should receive CSP support for organic farming.
k. The CSPs contribute to increasing the presence of high diversity landscape features towards the Biodiversity Strategy target of 10% of agricultural land by 2030. The strengthened obligation to dedicate at least 4% of arable land to nonproductive elements is a significant change for those Member States and farmers who relied on productive areas (nitrogen-fixing crops and catch crops) to comply with ?greening?.
l. All CSPs demonstrate some contribution towards the targets stemming from the EU Habitats and Birds Directives. Areas of EU grassland protected against conversion and ploughing have expanded by 9%, and voluntary measures for improved management aim to cover 25% of Natura 2000 areas.

About the sustainable use of pesticides
Over the past 10 years, the EU agricultural sector made significant steps towards a more sustainable future, without impacting its capacity to supply quality food:
* in 2019, pesticides sales declined by almost 30 000 tons (7% compared to 2011),
* greenhouse gas emissions have been around 435 million tons of CO2-equivalent, a 25% decrease compared to 1990,
* the area under organic production reached 13.8 million ha in 2019, following an annual increase of 5.5 % over the period 2012-2019,
* over the last ten years, the EU organic food and drink market doubled its size, worth around ?41 billion in 2019,
* the gross value-added of the EU agricultural production reached 224 billion euro in 2019, a 19% increase compared to 2010,
* the EU agri-food products trade balance recorded an annual growth of almost 10% in average between 2010 and 2020, reaching 62 billion euro of net trade in 2020.
In the meantime, climate change and biodiversity loss are already impacting EU agriculture:
* 50% of land in the EU cultivated with crops dependent on pollinators faces a pollination deficit,
* Droughts are costing an average of 9 billion euro a year in economic damage to agriculture, energy and public water supply,
* Antimicrobial resistance linked to excessive and inappropriate use in animal and human healthcare leads to an estimated 33,000 human deaths a year,
* Global mean crop yields of rice, maize and wheat are projected to decrease -3% to -10% per degree of warming.
So, it was the moment to reinforce the regulations on pesticides use. The European Commission has adopted a proposal for a new Regulation on the Sustainable Use of Plant Protection Products, including EU wide targets to reduce by 50% the use and risk of chemical pesticides by 2030, in line with the EU's Farm to Fork and Biodiversity strategies.
The proposal, adopted on 22 June 2022, is part of a package of measures to reduce the environmental footprint of the EU's food system and help mitigate the economic losses that we are already suffering due to climate change and biodiversity loss. The main measures include:
* Legally binding targets at EU level to reduce by 50% the use and the risk of chemical pesticides as well as the use of the more hazardous pesticides by 2030. Member States will set their own national reduction targets within defined parameters to ensure that the EU wide targets are achieved.
* Environmentally friendly pest control: New measures will ensure that all farmers and other professional pesticide users practice Integrated Pest Management (IPM). This is an environmentally friendly system of pest control which focuses on pest prevention and prioritizes alternative pest control methods, with chemical pesticides only used as a last resort.
* A ban on all pesticides in sensitive areas: The use of all pesticides is prohibited in places such as urban green areas, including public parks or gardens, playgrounds, recreation or sports grounds, public paths as well as protected areas in accordance with Natura 2000 and any ecologically sensitive area to be preserved for threatened pollinators.

II. FARM TO FORK STRATEGY
The Farm to Fork Strategy is at the heart of the Green Deal. This strategy aims to reward those farmers, fishers and other operators in the food chain who have already undergone the transition to sustainable practices, enable the transition for the others, and create additional opportunities for their businesses. As such, even though the EU?s transition to sustainable food systems has started in many areas, food systems remain one of the key drivers of climate change and environmental degradation. There is an urgent need to reduce dependency on pesticides and antimicrobials, reduce excess fertilization, increase organic farming, improve animal welfare, and reverse biodiversity loss.
Overall, European diets are not in line with national dietary recommendations, and the ?food environment? does not ensure that the healthy option is always the easiest one. If European diets were in line with dietary recommendations, the environmental footprint of food systems would be significantly reduced.
At the same time, efforts to tighten sustainability requirements in the EU food system should be accompanied by policies that help raise standards globally, in order to avoid the externalization and export of unsustainable practices.
The EU?s goals are to reduce the environmental and climate footprint of the EU food system and strengthen its resilience, ensure food security in the face of climate change and biodiversity loss and lead a global transition towards competitive sustainability from farm to fork and tapping into new opportunities. This means:

1. ensuring that the food chain, covering food production, transport, distribution, marketing and consumption, has a neutral or positive environmental impact, preserving and restoring the land, freshwater and sea-based resources on which the food system depends; helping to mitigate climate change and adapting to its impacts; protecting land, soil, water, air, plant and animal health and welfare; and reversing the loss of biodiversity;
2. ensuring food security, nutrition and public health ? making sure that everyone has access to sufficient, nutritious, sustainable food that upholds high standards of safety and quality, plant health, and animal health and welfare, while meeting dietary needs and food preferences;
3. preserving the affordability of food, while generating fairer economic returns in the supply chain, so that ultimately the most sustainable food also becomes the most affordable, fostering the competitiveness of the EU supply sector, promoting fair trade, creating new business opportunities, while ensuring integrity of the single market and occupational health and safety.
Technical and financial assistance from existing EU instruments, such as cohesion funds and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD), will support the transition.
Combined with certification and labelling on the sustainability performance of food products and with targeted incentives, the framework will allow operators to benefit from sustainable practices and progressively raise sustainability standards so as to become the norm for all food products placed on the EU market.
MAIN ACTIONS:
1. Ensuring sustainable food production
a. As announced in the Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP), the Commission will develop a regulatory framework for certifying CO2 removals from the atmosphere based on robust and transparent carbon accounting to monitor and verify the authenticity of carbon removals.
b. The circular bio-based economy is still a largely untapped potential for farmers and their cooperatives. For example, advanced bio-refineries that produce bio-fertilizers, protein feed, bioenergy, and bio-chemicals offer opportunities for the transition to a climate-neutral European economy and the creation of new jobs in primary production.
c. Farmers should grasp opportunities to reduce methane emissions from livestock by developing the production of renewable energy and investing in anaerobic digesters for biogas production from agriculture waste and residues, such as manure. Farms also have the potential to produce biogas from other sources of waste and residues, such as from the food and beverage industry, sewage, wastewater and municipal waste.
d. Farm houses and barns are often perfect for placing solar panels and such investments should be prioritized in the future CAP Strategic Plans.
e. The Commission will take additional action to reduce the overall use and risk of chemical pesticides by 50% and the use of more hazardous pesticides by 50% by 2030. To pave the way to alternatives and maintain farmers? incomes, the Commission will take a number of steps. It will revise the Sustainable Use of Pesticides Directive, enhance provisions on integrated pest management (IPM) and promote greater use of safe alternative ways of protecting harvests from pests and diseases. IPM will encourage the use of alternative control techniques, such as crop rotation and mechanical weeding, and will be one of the main tools in reducing the use of, and dependency on, chemical pesticides in general, and the use of more hazardous pesticides in particular. The Commission will also facilitate the placing on the market of pesticides containing biological active substances.
f. The Commission will develop with Member States an integrated nutrient management action plan to address nutrient pollution at source and increase the sustainability of the livestock sector. The Commission will also work with Member States to extend the application of precise fertilization techniques and sustainable agricultural practices of recycling of organic waste into renewable fertilizers (CAP Strategic Plans such as the Farm Sustainability Tool for nutrient management).
g. To help reduce the environmental and climate impact of animal production, avoid carbon leakage through imports and to support the ongoing transition towards more sustainable livestock farming, the Commission will facilitate the placing on the market of sustainable and innovative feed additives.
h. The Commission will therefore take action to reduce overall EU sales of antimicrobials for farmed animals and in aquaculture by 50% by2030. 
i. the Commission is carrying out a study which will look at the potential of new genomic techniques to improve sustainability along the food supply chain. Sustainable food systems also rely on seed security and diversity. Farmers need to have access to a range of quality seeds for plant varieties adapted to the pressures of climate change. The Commission will take measures to facilitate the registration of seed varieties, including for organic farming, and to ensure easier market access for traditional and locally-adapted varieties.
j. the Commission will put forward an Action Plan on organic farming. This will help Member States stimulate both supply and demand for organic products. It will ensure consumer trust and boost demand through promotion campaigns and green public procurement. This approach will help to reach the objective of at least 25% of the EU?s agricultural land under organic farming by 2030 and a significant increase in organic aquaculture.
k. The new ?eco-schemes? will offer a major stream of funding to boost sustainable practices, such as precision agriculture, agro-ecology (including organic farming), carbon farming and agroforestry.
l. In parallel to changes in agriculture, the shift to sustainable fish and seafood production must also be accelerated. 
m. Farmed fish and seafood generate a lower carbon footprint than animal production on land. In addition, it will be a significant support by the next European Maritime and Fisheries Fund for sustainable seafood farming.

2. Ensuring food security
a. The Commission will step up its coordination of a common European response to crises affecting food systems in order to ensure food security and safety, reinforce public health and mitigate their socio-economic impact in the EU. 
b. Drawing on the lessons learned, the Commission will assess the resilience of the food system and develop a contingency plan for ensuring food supply and food security to be put in place in times of crisis.
c. For stimulating sustainable food processing, wholesale, retail, hospitality and food services practices the Commission will develop an EU Code of conduct for responsible business and marketing practice accompanied with a monitoring framework.
d. The deployment of a circular and sustainable EU Bioeconomy will provide business opportunities, for instance linked to making use of food waste.
e. Food packaging plays a key role in the sustainability of food systems. The Commission will revise the food contact materials legislation to improve food safety and public health (in particular in reducing the use of hazardous chemicals), support the use of innovative and sustainable packaging solutions using environmentally-friendly, re-usable and recyclable materials, and contribute to food waste reduction. 
f. Promoting sustainable food consumption and facilitating the shift to healthy, sustainable diets it is of great importance. So, to improve the availability and price of sustainable food and to promote healthy and sustainable diets in institutional catering, the Commission will determine the best way of setting minimum mandatory criteria for sustainable food procurement.
g. Reducing food loss and waste
h. Combating food fraud along the food supply chain
i. Research and innovation (R&I) are key drivers in accelerating the transition to sustainable, healthy and inclusive food systems from primary production to consumption.
j. Through its external policies, including international cooperation and trade policy, the EU will pursue the development of Green Alliances on sustainable food systems with all its partners in bilateral, regional and multilateral fora. The EU will promote the global transition to sustainable food systems in international standard setting bodies, relevant multilateral fora and international events. 
The Commission will ensure that the strategy is implemented in close coherence with the other elements of the Green Deal, particularly the Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, the new CEAP and the Zero Pollution ambition.

III. SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE PROCEDURES
Sustainable agriculture consists of using farming techniques that respect the environment, biodiversity and the earth?s natural waste absorption capacity.
There is no single model that defines itself as sustainable by nature, but there are several that are based on different or even integrated techniques and knowledge. 

Fig. 4. Benefits of green / sustainable agricultures procedures (Sherya D. et al., Sustainable agriculture: a path towards better future, Food and Scientific Reports, vol. 1, no 9, 2020, 22-27)

1. Permaculture
The term refers not only to a set of agricultural practices oriented towards the natural maintenance of soil fertility, but also to a design system that intertwines issues from architecture, economics, ecology, anthropology and legal systems. The aim is to optimally and ethically design and manage landscapes to meet people?s needs in harmony with natural systems.
Here the emphasis is given on the use of perennial crops like fruit trees, nut trees, and shrubs that all function together in a designed system that mimics how plants in a natural ecosystem would function. Permaculture design techniques include herb spirals, keyhole and mandala gardens, hugelkultur garden beds (hugelkultur is the process of making raised garden beds filled with rotten wood. The result is a low-maintenance garden that doesn't require irrigation or fertilization), sheet mulching, and growing grain without tillage, each plant serving multiple purposes, and creating swales on contour to hold water high on the landscape.
2. Biodynamic farming
It is an approach of farming system where the farm is treated as a living system and significant emphasis is given on overall development of the farm. The interrelationships between components of the farm i.e. soil, plants, animals and microbes are also considered. Biodynamic system is a combination of "biological" practices which involves age-old organic farming techniques that improve soil health and ?dynamic? practices which involve the influence of cosmic forces to develop the farm, its inhabitants and products. It is reported some biodynamic preparations with the main ingredients like cow manure, silica and extracts of different plants parts like yarrow flowers, chamomile flowers, oak bark, stinging nettle shoots etc. which can either by applied through field spray or by composting.
3. Urban agriculture
It covers a wide range of activities, from the cultivation of different types of crops like grains, vegetables, mushrooms and fruits, and rearing animals such as poultry and fish to the cultivation of non-food products like aromatic and medicinal herbs or ornamental plants. It illuminates a different paradigm from the transformation of cities from only consumers of food to generators of agricultural products to contribute to sustainability, improved health, and poverty alleviation. It not only uses vacant urban areas for agriculture production but also helps to transform wastewater and organic solid waste into resources for growing agriculture products (the former can be used for irrigation, the latter as fertilizer). Another idea is segregating dry and wet wastes as well as recycling the kitchen wastes to prepare home-made compost, which will not only help to cut back city waste dumps but also provide each and every household a good potting mix for gardening.
4. Hydroponics and aqua-ponics
These innovative farming techniques involve the growing of plants without soil, nourishing the plants through specialized nutrients that are added to water. In the hydroponics system, crops are grown with the roots directly exposed to a mineral solution or with the roots in an inert medium like gravel or perlite. Cucumber, lettuce, tomato, peppers are commonly grown in this system. In aqua-ponics, rising of aquatic animals (such as fish) are combined with growing of hydroponic crops where water containing the waste material from the aquaculture fish is used to nourish the hydroponic plants. Both these systems have wide-scale availability from small home-scale systems to commercial-scale systems.
5. Agro-forestry and food forests
Agro-forestry is an integrated approach of using the interactive benefits from combining trees and shrubs with crops. It combines agricultural and forestry technologies to create more diverse, productive, profitable, healthy and sustainable land-use systems. Besides becoming an additional source of income for farmers, trees create a favorable microclimate (that maintains favorable temperature and soil humidity, while protecting crops from wind or heavy rain), stabilize soils, minimize nutrient runoff and improve soil structure. Food forests are designed permaculture systems that consist of a multilayered edible ?forest.? Such a ?forest? is composed almost entirely of perennial food plants, including a canopy of tall and dwarf fruit and nut trees, a fruit shrub layer, layers of perennial herbs, mushrooms and vegetables at the ground level, climbing plants, and root vegetables underground.

Fig. 5. Different models of agro-forestry (Sherya D. et al., Sustainable agriculture: a path towards better future, Food and Scientific Reports, vol. 1, no 9, 2020, 22-27)

6. Poly-cultures and crop rotation
In order to tackle pest and weed problems (as some pests prefer specific host), maintain and enhance the soil quality, cope up with weather fluctuations, ensure additional income to the farmers and a healthy diet to the community, poly-culture and crop rotation over monoculture is very scientific and innovative approach. Here emphasis is given on the fact that crops which are growing together should be complementary to each other.
7. Growing heirlooms and older varieties
In order to meet market demand for the viability of produce to travel long distances and to be stored for long periods of time, only a few varieties are grown commercially. This reduced genetic variability in food crops leads to their inability to adapt to changes in climate, disease and pest incidence. To save the gene pool of indigenous varieties, preserve the biodiversity of seeds, establish future climate-resistant varieties, growing of heirloom and older varieties and saving their seeds are very important.
8. Natural animal rising
To protect the crop from animal consumption, industrial agriculture keeps livestock grazing away from the farm, simultaneously crops away from manure. But there exists a mutually beneficial relationship between grazing animals and grassland. Through managed grazing, in one hand, wide variety of nutrients will be provided to the animals, on the other hand excessive foot fall will help to compact the soil thus preventing soil erosion while the manure left behind will enrich the soil.
9. Mulching, groundcovers and manual weed control
In order to provide a protective layer to the soil, restrict proliferation of weeds, conserve soil moisture, improve soil health, fertility and shield soil from direct sunlight, mulching and groundcovers is a good option. Mulches can be of both organic and inorganic origin; the former consists of straws, husks, saw dust, grasses and cover crops, manures and composts etc. while the later mostly indicates the polyethylene mulch in which the most popular is the black plastic mulch.
10.  Natural pest management
In this method of controlling pest insects, birds, animals, plants and mechanical practices are used instead of using chemicals. The farm can be managed in such a way that it can harbor natural predators of agricultural pests. Using the prey-predator relationship, the population of harmful pests is kept under control.
Organic pesticides are derived from naturally occurring sources. These include living organisms such as the bacteria Bacillus thuringiensis, which is used to control caterpillar pests, or plant derivatives such as pyrethrins (from the dried flower heads of Chrysanthemum cinerariifolium) or neem oil (from the seeds of Azadirachta indica). Mineral-based inorganic pesticides such as sulfur and copper are also allowed.
In addition to pesticides, organic pest control integrates biological, cultural, and genetic controls to minimize pest damage. Biological control utilizes the natural enemies of pests, such as predatory insects (e.g., ladybugs) or parasitoids (e.g., certain wasps) to attack insect pests. Pest cycles can be disrupted with cultural controls, of which crop rotation is the most widely used. Finally, traditional plant breeding has produced numerous crop varieties that are resistant to specific pests. The use of such varieties and the planting of genetically diverse crops provide genetic control against pests and many plant diseases.
These techniques are defined as components of ORGANIC FARMING, meaning ?agriculture in harmony with nature?.


IV. ORGANIC FARMING IN EU
1. Organic farming procedures
It is a production model that only allows the use of natural substances, according to the European regulation EEC 2092/91, and aims at avoiding the massive exploitation of natural resources. Beside the already mentioned procedures, biological fertilizers are applied and natural-derived biocides. Certified organic farms do not use synthetic chemicals such as fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides, insecticides, pesticides, but only use natural fertilizers and traditional techniques (crop rotation).
Compared with conventional agriculture, organic farming uses fewer pesticides, reduces soil erosion, decreases nitrate leaching into groundwater and surface water, and recycles animal wastes back into the farm. These benefits are counterbalanced by higher food costs for consumers and generally lower yields. Indeed, yields of organic crops have been found to be about 25 percent lower overall than conventionally grown crops, although this can vary considerably depending upon the type of crop. The challenge for future organic agriculture will be to maintain its environmental benefits, increase yields, and reduce prices while meeting the challenges of climate change and an increasing world population.
Farmers must be certified for their produce and products to be labeled ?organic,? and there are specific organic standards for crops, animals, and wild-crafted products and for the processing of agricultural products. Organic standards in the European Union and the United States, for example, prohibit the use of synthetic pesticides, fertilizers, ionizing radiation, sewage sludge, and genetically engineered plants or products. In the EU, organic certification and inspection is carried out by approved organic control bodies according to EU standards.

Fig. 6. Sustainable agriculture procedures

2. EU Organic farming Action Plan
The Commission has set out a comprehensive organic action plan for the European Union. Through it, the Commission will aim to achieve the European Green Deal target of 25% of agricultural land under organic farming by 2030.

Fig. 7. Organic farming area in the total EU agriculture surfaces in 2019
The action plan is broken into three interlinked axes that reflect the structure of the food supply chain and the Green Deal's sustainability objectives.
Axis 1: stimulate demand and ensure consumer trust.
Axis 2: stimulate conversion and reinforce the entire value chain.
Axis 3: organics leading by example: improve the contribution of organic farming to environmental sustainability.
The three axes will be supported by 23 actions, continuing some of the successful 2014-20 actions, as well as putting forward an array of new actions and mobilizing different sources of funding.
Focus on research and innovation. Organic farming is knowledge-intensive. However, there is still a clear need to further enhance the knowledge so that organic farming can become even more sustainable and also more productive. To support the ambitions of the action plan, the Commission intends to dedicate at least 30% of the budget for research and innovation actions in the fields of agriculture, forestry and rural areas to topics specific to or relevant for the organic sector. This includes issues such as increased crop yields, genetic biodiversity and alternatives to contentious products.
Axis 1: stimulate demand and ensure consumer trust
Increasing the consumption of organic products and strengthening consumers? trust in them are vital to encourage farmers to convert to organics. To support continued growth and maintain a profitable market for organic operators, the Commission will undertake actions to:
* promote organic farming and the EU logo;
* promote organic canteens and increase the use of green public procurement;
* reinforce organic school schemes;
* prevent food fraud and strengthen consumer trust;
* improve traceability;
* facilitate the contribution of the private sector.
Axis 2: stimulating conversion and reinforcing the entire value chain
To continue progress in production and processing, the action plan will:
* encourage conversion, investments and exchanges of best practices;
* develop sector analysis to increase market transparency;
* support the organization of the food chain;
* reinforce local and small-value processing and foster short trade circuit;
* improve animal nutrition in accordance with organic rules;
* reinforce organic aquaculture.
Axis 3: organics leading by example: improving the contribution of organic farming to sustainability
The Commission will further improve the organic sector?s contribution to sustainability and environmental challenges through actions focused on:
* reducing climate and environmental footprint;
* enhancing genetic biodiversity and increasing yields;
* developing alternatives to contentious inputs and other plant protection products;
* enhancing animal welfare;
* making more efficient use of resources.
3. Biocides through pyrolytic degradation of biomass
Sustainable agriculture employs efficient management of environmental bio-resources which can be used to satisfy anthropogenic needs while maintaining and conserving natural resources at the same time. However, sustainable agriculture also focuses at lowering the pest incidence without disturbing nature's balance. Pyrolysis process is one of the methods chosen in order to strive for bio-pesticide formation. Pyrolysis is an eco-sustainable technique in the energy conversion of biomass to produce bio-oil, biochar and syngas. Slow pyrolysis was often selected as it lowers down heating rates and longer retention time enhances vapors formation from complete secondary reactions forming wood vinegar and biochar. Hardwood or softwood vinegar is an aqueous liquid mixture of organic acids and compounds such as acetic acid, methanol, furfural, phenol, acetaldehyde, furan, formic, propionic and butyric acid, and other volatile organics.

V. ROLE OF BIOFERTILIZERS IN GREEN / SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
Biofertilizer refers to the use of microorganisms to meet nutritional needs, whereas in other countries, the term microbial bioinoculant is used. Biofertilizers are bio-based organic fertilizers that either could be from plant or animal sources or from living or dormant microbial cells that have the potential to improve the bioavailability and bioaccessibility of nutrient uptake in plants.
So biofertilizers are properly defined as ?the preparations containing live microbes that help in enhancing soil fertility by fixing atmospheric nitrogen, solubilizing phosphorus or decomposing organic wastes or by elevating plant growth through the production of growth hormones with their biological activities?. Biofertilizers are generally applied in solid or dry forms, which are prepared after packing on suitable carriers such as clay minerals, rice bran, peat, lignite, wheat bran, humus, and wood charcoal. Carriers increase the shelf life and enable the easy handling of microbial inoculants.
The benefits of biofertilizers include low cost, enhanced nutrient availability, improved soil fertility, protect plants from soil-borne pathogens, sustainable agricultural production, enhanced biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, promote phytohormone production, improve soil health, causing less environmental pollution, and its continued use improves the fertility of soil considerably.
Based on the source and raw material, global biofertilizer is marketed under two major categories like organic residue-based biofertilizer and microorganisms based biofertilizer. Green manure, crop residues, treated sewage sludge, and farmyard manure are generally organic-based biofertilizers. While on the contrary, microorganism-based biofertilizers contain beneficial microorganisms like bacteria, fungi, and algae.

Fig. 8. Types of biofertilizers (Chaudhary P. et al., Frontiers in Plant Science, Overview of biofertilizers in crop production and stress management for sustainable agriculture, August 2022)


Fig. 9. Role of biofertilizers for soil health and crop productivity preserving ((Chaudhary P. et al., Frontiers in Plant Science, Overview of biofertilizers in crop production and stress management for sustainable agriculture, August 2022)

Organic matter is a priority for organic farmers. Organic matter can be applied through the application of manure, compost, and animal by-products, such as feather meal or blood meal.. Compost adds organic matter, providing a wide range of nutrients for plants, and adds beneficial microbes to the soil. Given that these nutrients are mostly in an unmineralized form that cannot be taken up by plants, soil microbes are needed to break down organic matter and transform nutrients into a bioavailable ?mineralized? state. 

VI. ROLE OF GENETIC ENGINEERING PLANTS (GM)-PROS AND CONS
Genetic modification of crops has substantially focused on improving traits for desirable outcomes. It has resulted in the development of crops with enhanced yields, quality, and tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses. With the advent of introducing favorable traits into crops, biotechnology has created a path for the involvement of genetically modified (GM) crops into sustainable food production systems. Although these plants heralded a new era of crop production, their widespread adoption faces diverse challenges due to concerns about the environment, human health, and moral issues. Mitigating these concerns with scientific investigations is vital with the purpose of GM crops? deep characterization and of the appropriate strategies to overcome their widespread adoption.
New and recent tools for genome editing, with a special focus on the CRISPR/Cas9 platform were elaborated with important impact on the GM crops acceptance for sustainable / green agriculture applications. The advancement in molecular tools through plant genome editing addresses many of the GM crop issues and facilitates their development without incorporating transgenic modifications. It will allow for a higher acceptance rate of GM crops in sustainable agriculture with rapid approval for commercialization. 
The majority of European and Middle Eastern countries have imposed full or partial limitations on the commercialization of GM crops. Nevertheless, because the GM crops are considered as good candidates for sustainable food production, it is imperative to perform the risk assessment of any developed GM crop, exploring their negative and positive consequences for the current agricultural developments.
Besides these techniques, genome editing tools has enabled the plant transformation with ease, accuracy, and specificity. Some of these methods including Zinc Finger Nucleases (ZFNs), Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases (TALENs), and Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)/Cas system, were directed towards the concerns related to the unpredictability and inefficiency of traditional transgenesis.
There has been a sharp increase in the approval of the number of plant species with GM varieties. Around 44 countries have provided regulatory acceptance to 40 GM crops and to 509 events of genetic modification since January 2022. This manipulation includes 41 commercial traits for use in cultivation, food, and feed.
The inception of GM crops has been controversial mainly due to the ethical concerns and issues of sustainability surrounding the negative impacts of GM crops. 


Fig. 10. Process of genetic engineering modification of crops (Mughair A, A, et al., Genetically engineered crops for sustainably enhanced food production systems, Frontier in Plant Science, November 2022, 1-24)


Fig. 11. Major environmental concern related to GMO crops (Mughair A, A, et al., Genetically engineered crops for sustainably enhanced food production systems, Frontier in Plant Science, November 2022, 1-24)


Fig. 12. Human health related threats of GMO crops (Mughair A, A, et al., Genetically engineered crops for sustainably enhanced food production systems, Frontier in Plant Science, November 2022, 1-24)


Fig. 13. CRISPR CAS9/sgRNA plant genome editing system ((Mughair A, A, et al., Genetically engineered crops for sustainably enhanced food production systems, Frontier in Plant Science, November 2022, 1-24)

CRISPR/Cas9 technique has the potential to enhance the sustainability and improves global food security in various ways. It can introduce:
a. Abiotic / biotic stress tolerance
b. Crop yield enhancement
c. Quality improvement
d. Nutritional enhancement
e. Enhancing hybrid breeding
GM crops faces the moral and ethical dilemma of their incorporation into the sustainable agricultural practices, which can be negotiated through the appropriate balance of benefits and negative impacts of GM crops by encompassing all the three relational aspects of sustainability, such as the environment, society, and the economy.
Beside the GM use in sustainable agriculture, biotechnology can contribute in many directions to the development of green agriculture as it is presented in the following scheme.


Fig. 14. BT agriculture techniques contributions to the green agriculture development (Tyczewska A. et al., Agricultural biotechnology for sustainable food security, Trends in Biotechnology, March 2023, Vol. 41, No. 3, 331-341).



